[Skip to
content](#content)

[](https://swprs.org/)

<div class="cover">

</div>

[Search](#search-container)

<div id="search-container" class="header-search-block bg-graphite hidden">

<span class="screen-reader-text">Search for:</span>

</div>

<div class="header-inner section-inner">

[![Swiss Policy Research
Logo](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/05/swiss-policy-research-logo-300.png)](https://swprs.org/)

[Swiss Policy Research](https://swprs.org/)

Geopolitics and
    Media

</div>

<div class="navigation section no-padding bg-dark">

Menu

<div class="main-navigation">

  - <span id="menu-item-4374">[Start](https://swprs.org)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-5941">[Studien](https://swprs.org/srf-propaganda-analyse/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-4361">[SRF /
        ZDF](https://swprs.org/srf-propaganda-analyse/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-4359">[NZZ-Studie](https://swprs.org/die-nzz-studie/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-4373">[Agenturen](https://swprs.org/der-propaganda-multiplikator/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-7978">[Medienmatrix](https://swprs.org/die-propaganda-matrix/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-9423">[Analysen](https://swprs.org/medien-navigator/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-9414">[Navigator](https://swprs.org/medien-navigator/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-8524">[Techniken](https://swprs.org/der-propaganda-schluessel/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-10908">[Wikipedia](https://swprs.org/propaganda-in-der-wikipedia/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-9920">[Kriege](https://swprs.org/logik-imperialer-kriege/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-4362">[Netzwerke](https://swprs.org/netzwerk-medien-schweiz/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-6283">[Schweiz](https://swprs.org/netzwerk-medien-schweiz/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-7215">[Deutschland](https://swprs.org/netzwerk-medien-deutschland/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-17401">[Österreich](https://swprs.org/medien-in-oesterreich/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-7216">[USA](https://swprs.org/das-american-empire-und-seine-medien/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-9228">[Fokus
    I](https://swprs.org/bericht-eines-journalisten/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-12119">[Journalistenbericht](https://swprs.org/bericht-eines-journalisten/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-12117">[Russische
        Propaganda](https://swprs.org/russische-propaganda/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-12118">[Die
        »Israel-Lobby«](https://swprs.org/die-israel-lobby-fakten-und-mythen/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-13505">[Pädokriminalität](https://swprs.org/geopolitik-und-paedokriminalitaet/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-17258">[Fokus
    II](https://swprs.org/migration-und-medien/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-32838">[Coronavirus](https://swprs.org/covid-19-hinweis-ii/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-12939">[Integrity
        Initiative](https://swprs.org/die-integrity-initiative/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-17290">[Migration &
        Medien](https://swprs.org/migration-und-medien/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-17291">[Magnitsky
        Act](https://swprs.org/der-fall-magnitsky/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-21964">[Projekt](https://swprs.org/kontakt/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-8525">[Kontakt](https://swprs.org/kontakt/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-10193">[Seitenübersicht](https://swprs.org/uebersicht/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-8637">[Medienspiegel](https://swprs.org/medienspiegel/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-33287">[Donationen](https://swprs.org/donationen/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-14415">[English](https://swprs.org/contact/)</span>

</div>

[Open Search](#)

</div>

<div class="wrapper section medium-padding">

<div class="section-inner clear" data-role="main">

<div id="content" class="content clear center">

# Covid-19: A report from Italy

<div class="post-content clear">

**Published**: March 31, 2020  
**Main article**: [Facts about
Covid-19](https://swprs.org/a-swiss-doctor-on-covid-19/)

A message from an observer in Italy about the situation in Northern
Italy on March 31, 2020:

„In recent weeks, most of the Eastern European nurses who worked 24
hours a day, 7 days a week supporting people in need of care in Italy
have left the country in a hurry. This is not least because of the
panic-mongering and the curfews and border closures threatened by the
„emergency governments“. As a result, old people in need of care and
disabled people, some without relatives, were left helpless by their
carers.

Many of these abandoned people then ended up after a few days in the
hospitals, which had been permanently overloaded for years, because they
were dehydrated, among other things. Unfortunately, the hospitals lacked
the personnel who had to look after the children locked up in their
apartments because schools and kindergartens had been closed. This then
led to the complete collapse of the care for the disabled and the
elderly, especially in those areas where even harder „measures“ were
ordered, and to chaotic conditions.

The nursing emergency, which was caused by the panic, temporarily led to
many deaths among those in need of care and increasingly among younger
patients in the hospitals. These fatalities then served to cause even
more panic among those in charge and the media, who reported, for
example, „another 475 fatalities“, „The dead are being removed from
hospitals by the army“, accompanied by pictures of coffins and army
trucks lined up.

However, this was the result of the funeral directors‘ fear of the
„killer virus“, who therefore refused their services. Moreover, on the
one hand there were too many deaths at once and on the other hand the
government passed a law that the corpses carrying the coronavirus had to
be cremated. In Catholic Italy, few cremations had been carried out in
the past. Therefore there were only a few small crematoria, which very
quickly reached their limits. Therefore the deceased had to be laid out
in different churches.

In principle, this development is the same in all countries. However,
the quality of the health system has a considerable influence on the
effects. Therefore, there are fewer problems in Germany, Austria or
Switzerland than in Italy, Spain or the USA. However, as can be seen in
the official figures, there is no significant increase in the mortality
rate. Just a small mountain that came from this tragedy.“

#### See also

  - [Mortality associated with COVID-19 outbreaks in care homes: early
    international
    evidence](https://ltccovid.org/2020/04/12/mortality-associated-with-covid-19-outbreaks-in-care-homes-early-international-evidence/)
  - [31 dead in a Canadian nursing home after nurses left in a
    hurry](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/16/world/canada/montreal-nursing-homes-coronavirus.html)
    (New York Times)
  - [Germany: Nurses fleeing or unable to enter country due to closed
    borders](https://www.sueddeutsche.de/politik/coronavirus-pflegekraefte-ausland-1.4866124)
    (Süddeutsche)

##### [Back to main article: Facts on Covid-19](https://swprs.org/a-swiss-doctor-on-covid-19/)

-----

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div id="footer" class="footer bg-graphite">

<div class="section-inner row clear" data-role="complementary">

<div class="column column-1 one-third medium-padding">

<div class="widgets">

<div id="nav_menu-3" class="widget widget_nav_menu">

<div class="widget-content clear">

### Swiss Policy Research

<div class="menu-allgemein-container">

  - <span id="menu-item-251">[Kontakt](https://swprs.org/kontakt/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-33090">[Übersicht](https://swprs.org/uebersicht/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-33286">[Donationen](https://swprs.org/donationen/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-15372">[Disclaimer](https://swprs.org/disclaimer/)</span>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="column column-2 one-third medium-padding">

<div class="widgets">

<div id="nav_menu-4" class="widget widget_nav_menu">

<div class="widget-content clear">

### English

<div class="menu-english-container">

  - <span id="menu-item-20017">[About Us /
    Contact](https://swprs.org/contact/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-20015">[The Media
    Navigator](https://swprs.org/media-navigator/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-20016">[The CFR and the
    Media](https://swprs.org/the-american-empire-and-its-media/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-33285">[Donations](https://swprs.org/donations/)</span>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="column column-3 one-third medium-padding">

<div class="widgets">

<div id="blog_subscription-4" class="widget widget_blog_subscription jetpack_subscription_widget">

<div class="widget-content clear">

### Follow by email

Follow

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="credits section bg-dark small-padding">

<div class="credits-inner section-inner clear">

[WordPress.com](https://wordpress.com/?ref=footer_custom_com).

[Up ↑](# "To the top")

</div>

</div>

<div style="display:none">

</div>

![](https://pixel.wp.com/b.gif?v=noscript)
