[Skip to
content](#content)

[](https://swprs.org/)

<div class="cover">

</div>

[Search](#search-container)

<div id="search-container" class="header-search-block bg-graphite hidden">

<span class="screen-reader-text">Search for:</span>

</div>

<div class="header-inner section-inner">

[![Swiss Policy Research
Logo](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/05/swiss-policy-research-logo-300.png)](https://swprs.org/)

[Swiss Policy Research](https://swprs.org/)

Geopolitics and
    Media

</div>

<div class="navigation section no-padding bg-dark">

Menu

<div class="main-navigation">

  - <span id="menu-item-4374">[Start](https://swprs.org)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-5941">[Studien](https://swprs.org/srf-propaganda-analyse/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-4361">[SRF /
        ZDF](https://swprs.org/srf-propaganda-analyse/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-4359">[NZZ-Studie](https://swprs.org/die-nzz-studie/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-4373">[Agenturen](https://swprs.org/der-propaganda-multiplikator/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-7978">[Medienmatrix](https://swprs.org/die-propaganda-matrix/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-9423">[Analysen](https://swprs.org/medien-navigator/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-9414">[Navigator](https://swprs.org/medien-navigator/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-8524">[Techniken](https://swprs.org/der-propaganda-schluessel/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-10908">[Wikipedia](https://swprs.org/propaganda-in-der-wikipedia/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-9920">[Kriege](https://swprs.org/logik-imperialer-kriege/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-4362">[Netzwerke](https://swprs.org/netzwerk-medien-schweiz/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-6283">[Schweiz](https://swprs.org/netzwerk-medien-schweiz/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-7215">[Deutschland](https://swprs.org/netzwerk-medien-deutschland/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-17401">[Österreich](https://swprs.org/medien-in-oesterreich/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-7216">[USA](https://swprs.org/das-american-empire-und-seine-medien/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-9228">[Fokus
    I](https://swprs.org/bericht-eines-journalisten/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-12119">[Journalistenbericht](https://swprs.org/bericht-eines-journalisten/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-12117">[Russische
        Propaganda](https://swprs.org/russische-propaganda/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-12118">[Die
        »Israel-Lobby«](https://swprs.org/die-israel-lobby-fakten-und-mythen/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-13505">[Pädokriminalität](https://swprs.org/geopolitik-und-paedokriminalitaet/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-17258">[Fokus
    II](https://swprs.org/migration-und-medien/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-32838">[Coronavirus](https://swprs.org/covid-19-hinweis-ii/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-12939">[Integrity
        Initiative](https://swprs.org/die-integrity-initiative/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-17290">[Migration &
        Medien](https://swprs.org/migration-und-medien/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-17291">[Magnitsky
        Act](https://swprs.org/der-fall-magnitsky/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-21964">[Projekt](https://swprs.org/kontakt/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-8525">[Kontakt](https://swprs.org/kontakt/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-10193">[Seitenübersicht](https://swprs.org/uebersicht/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-8637">[Medienspiegel](https://swprs.org/medienspiegel/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-33287">[Donationen](https://swprs.org/donationen/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-14415">[English](https://swprs.org/contact/)</span>

</div>

[Open Search](#)

</div>

<div class="wrapper section medium-padding">

<div class="section-inner clear" data-role="main">

<div id="content" class="content clear center">

# Covid-19 Virus Origin: The Mojiang Miners Passage Hypothesis

<div class="post-content clear">

**Published**: July 16, 2020; **Updated**: August 2, 2020  
**Languages**:
[DE](https://swprs.org/ursprung-des-covid-19-virus-die-mojiang-minenarbeiter-hypothese/),
[EN](https://swprs.org/covid-19-virus-origin-the-mojiang-miners-passage-hypothesis/);
**Share on**:
[Twitter](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?url=https://swprs.org/covid-19-virus-origin-the-mojiang-miners-passage-hypothesis/)
/
[Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/share.php?u=https://swprs.org/covid-19-virus-origin-the-mojiang-miners-passage-hypothesis/)

Virologist Jonathan Latham and geneticist Allison Wilson have proposed
[a new
hypothesis](https://www.independentsciencenews.org/commentaries/a-proposed-origin-for-sars-cov-2-and-the-covid-19-pandemic/)
for the origin of the SARS-CoV-2 virus and the Covid-19 pandemic.

It has been known since February that a bat virus called RaTG13,
collected by the Wuhan Institute of Virology (WIV) in 2013, is the
closest known relative of SARS-CoV-2.

It has been known since May (to some) that RaTG13, previously known as
BtCoV/4991, [was
found](https://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/seven-year-covid-trail-revealed-l5vxt7jqp)
in bat feces in a mineshaft near Mojiang in southwest China, after six
miners fell ill with Covid19-like pneumonia and three of them eventually
died.

The WIV itself didn’t disclose this link, however. On the contrary, in a
March 2020 interview the famous WIV “bat woman” Shi Zhengli [falsely
claimed](https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/how-chinas-bat-woman-hunted-down-viruses-from-sars-to-the-new-coronavirus1/)
“a fungus” had caused the miners’ illness.

It is also known that RaTG13, despite its 96% similarity, cannot be the
direct ancestor of SARS-CoV-2, as natural mutations in the environment
would have taken at least several decades. But it has been shown
computationally that RaTG13 can itself already infect human lung cells
to some extent.

Finally, it is [known
that](https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/6981198-Analysis-of-Six-Patients-With-Unknown-Viruses.html)
the sick Mojiang miners, exhibiting severe Covid19-like pneumonia, were
hospitalized *for up to four months* before being either discharged or
dying back in 2012.

Latham and Wilson now propose that the Mojiang miners were originally
infected by RaTG13 and/or similar coronaviruses during their up to two
week stay in the mineshaft inhaling aerosols from bat feces. RaTG13 then
turned into SARS-CoV-2 through mutations and/or recombinations *in the
lungs of the miners* during their up to four month stay in the hospital
(the Mojiang miners passage).

Thus the infected lungs of the miners may have served as a ‘human
incubator’ enabling RaTG13 to adapt to both the human ACE2 cell receptor
and the human immune system in just four months instead of several
decades as would have been expected in a natural (animal) environment.

The Wuhan Institute of Virology in 2012/2013 received tissue and blood
samples of the surviving or dead miners that may already have included
what is now known as SARS-CoV-2. WIV virologists may then have been
waiting five more years, until the completion of their BSL-4 (high
security) lab in 2018, before beginning to do research on what is now
known as SARS-CoV-2.

SARS-CoV-2 may then have escaped, probably in autumn 2019, from the WIV
BSL-4 lab, perhaps through an infected lab worker, initiating what is
now a global coronavirus pandemic.

This, in short, is the Latham-Wilson [Mojiang Miners Passage
(MMP)](https://www.independentsciencenews.org/commentaries/a-proposed-origin-for-sars-cov-2-and-the-covid-19-pandemic/)
hypothesis. It can explain most or all of the unusual properties of
SARS-CoV-2, including its very strong binding to human ACE2 cell
receptors and its very low mutation rate, without having to assume “gain
of function” research (i.e. genetic engineering) — although the
hypothesis doesn’t exclude this, either.

Interestingly, archive entries show that the origin of RaTG13 in a
Chinese database [was
changed](https://twitter.com/TheSeeker268/status/1286327367019839490)
from “lung fluid” (from the miners) to “bat feces” in July 2020 without
any annotation. In addition, the WIV [claimed
that](https://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/seven-year-covid-trail-revealed-l5vxt7jqp)
the RaTG13 sample had “disintegrated” during analyses in early 2020 and
was no longer available (and thus no longer verifiable).

**Read the full article by Latham and Wilson:**

[A Proposed Origin for SARS-CoV-2 and the COVID-19
Pandemic](https://www.independentsciencenews.org/commentaries/a-proposed-origin-for-sars-cov-2-and-the-covid-19-pandemic/)
(ISN, July 15, 2020)

**See also:**

  - [Seven year coronavirus trail from mine deaths to a Wuhan
    lab](https://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/seven-year-covid-trail-revealed-l5vxt7jqp)
    (London Times, 7/4/20)
  - [Dr. Fauci Backed Controversial Wuhan Lab with U.S. Dollars for
    Risky Coronavirus
    Research](https://www.newsweek.com/dr-fauci-backed-controversial-wuhan-lab-millions-us-dollars-risky-coronavirus-research-1500741)
    (Newsweek, 4/28/20)
  - [How China’s ‘Bat Woman’ Hunted Down Viruses from SARS to the New
    Coronavirus](https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/how-chinas-bat-woman-hunted-down-viruses-from-sars-to-the-new-coronavirus1/)
    (Scientific American, 3/11/20)
  - An early article from 2014: [A New Killer Virus in
    China?](https://www.sciencemag.org/news/2014/03/new-killer-virus-china)
    (Science Magazine, 03/20/14)
  - [Pentagon biolab discovered MERS and SARS-like coronaviruses in
    bats](https://armswatch.com/project-g-2101-pentagon-biolab-discovered-mers-and-sars-like-coronaviruses-in-bats/)
    (Arms Watch, 4/30/20)

-----

**Share on**:
[Twitter](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?url=https://swprs.org/covid-19-virus-origin-the-mojiang-miners-passage-hypothesis/)
/
[Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/share.php?u=https://swprs.org/covid-19-virus-origin-the-mojiang-miners-passage-hypothesis/)

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div id="footer" class="footer bg-graphite">

<div class="section-inner row clear" data-role="complementary">

<div class="column column-1 one-third medium-padding">

<div class="widgets">

<div id="nav_menu-3" class="widget widget_nav_menu">

<div class="widget-content clear">

### Swiss Policy Research

<div class="menu-allgemein-container">

  - <span id="menu-item-251">[Kontakt](https://swprs.org/kontakt/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-33090">[Übersicht](https://swprs.org/uebersicht/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-33286">[Donationen](https://swprs.org/donationen/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-15372">[Disclaimer](https://swprs.org/disclaimer/)</span>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="column column-2 one-third medium-padding">

<div class="widgets">

<div id="nav_menu-4" class="widget widget_nav_menu">

<div class="widget-content clear">

### English

<div class="menu-english-container">

  - <span id="menu-item-20017">[About Us /
    Contact](https://swprs.org/contact/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-20015">[The Media
    Navigator](https://swprs.org/media-navigator/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-20016">[The CFR and the
    Media](https://swprs.org/the-american-empire-and-its-media/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-33285">[Donations](https://swprs.org/donations/)</span>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="column column-3 one-third medium-padding">

<div class="widgets">

<div id="blog_subscription-4" class="widget widget_blog_subscription jetpack_subscription_widget">

<div class="widget-content clear">

### Follow by email

Follow

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="credits section bg-dark small-padding">

<div class="credits-inner section-inner clear">

[WordPress.com](https://wordpress.com/?ref=footer_custom_com).

[Up ↑](# "To the top")

</div>

</div>

<div style="display:none">

</div>

![](https://pixel.wp.com/b.gif?v=noscript)
