[Skip to
content](#content)

[](https://swprs.org/)

<div class="cover">

</div>

[Search](#search-container)

<div id="search-container" class="header-search-block bg-graphite hidden">

<span class="screen-reader-text">Search for:</span>

</div>

<div class="header-inner section-inner">

[![Swiss Policy Research
Logo](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/05/swiss-policy-research-logo-300.png)](https://swprs.org/)

[Swiss Policy Research](https://swprs.org/)

Geopolitics and
    Media

</div>

<div class="navigation section no-padding bg-dark">

Menu

<div class="main-navigation">

  - <span id="menu-item-4374">[Start](https://swprs.org)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-5941">[Studien](https://swprs.org/srf-propaganda-analyse/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-4361">[SRF /
        ZDF](https://swprs.org/srf-propaganda-analyse/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-4359">[NZZ-Studie](https://swprs.org/die-nzz-studie/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-4373">[Agenturen](https://swprs.org/der-propaganda-multiplikator/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-7978">[Medienmatrix](https://swprs.org/die-propaganda-matrix/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-9423">[Analysen](https://swprs.org/medien-navigator/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-9414">[Navigator](https://swprs.org/medien-navigator/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-8524">[Techniken](https://swprs.org/der-propaganda-schluessel/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-10908">[Wikipedia](https://swprs.org/propaganda-in-der-wikipedia/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-9920">[Kriege](https://swprs.org/logik-imperialer-kriege/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-4362">[Netzwerke](https://swprs.org/netzwerk-medien-schweiz/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-6283">[Schweiz](https://swprs.org/netzwerk-medien-schweiz/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-7215">[Deutschland](https://swprs.org/netzwerk-medien-deutschland/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-17401">[Österreich](https://swprs.org/medien-in-oesterreich/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-7216">[USA](https://swprs.org/das-american-empire-und-seine-medien/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-9228">[Fokus
    I](https://swprs.org/bericht-eines-journalisten/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-12119">[Journalistenbericht](https://swprs.org/bericht-eines-journalisten/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-12117">[Russische
        Propaganda](https://swprs.org/russische-propaganda/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-12118">[Die
        »Israel-Lobby«](https://swprs.org/die-israel-lobby-fakten-und-mythen/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-13505">[Pädokriminalität](https://swprs.org/geopolitik-und-paedokriminalitaet/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-17258">[Fokus
    II](https://swprs.org/migration-und-medien/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-32838">[Coronavirus](https://swprs.org/covid-19-hinweis-ii/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-12939">[Integrity
        Initiative](https://swprs.org/die-integrity-initiative/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-17290">[Migration &
        Medien](https://swprs.org/migration-und-medien/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-17291">[Magnitsky
        Act](https://swprs.org/der-fall-magnitsky/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-21964">[Projekt](https://swprs.org/kontakt/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-8525">[Kontakt](https://swprs.org/kontakt/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-10193">[Seitenübersicht](https://swprs.org/uebersicht/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-8637">[Medienspiegel](https://swprs.org/medienspiegel/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-33287">[Donationen](https://swprs.org/donationen/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-14415">[English](https://swprs.org/contact/)</span>

</div>

[Open Search](#)

</div>

<div class="wrapper section medium-padding">

<div class="section-inner clear" data-role="main">

<div id="content" class="content clear center">

# COVID-19 Lethality: How Not to Do It

<div class="post-content clear">

![Covid deaths in Sweden: Prediction by Imperial College London model
(no measures and moderate measures) versus reality without lockdown
(HTY/FOHM).](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/06/sweden-imperial-comparison-june-5.png?w=736)

**Published**: June 23, 2020; **Languages**:
[DE](https://swprs.org/covid-19-letalitat-wie-man-es-nicht-macht/),
[EN](https://swprs.org/covid19-lethality-how-not-to-do-it/)  
**Share on**:
[Twitter](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?url=https://swprs.org/covid19-lethality-how-not-to-do-it/)
/
[Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/share.php?u=https://swprs.org/covid19-lethality-how-not-to-do-it/)

A German medical professor claims the Covid-19 infection fatality rate
(IFR) is [“five to ten times
higher”](https://www.heise.de/tp/features/Wie-gefaehrlich-ist-Covid-19-im-Vergleich-zur-saisonalen-Grippe-4790313.html)
than the IFR of seasonal influenza. But he makes two classic mistakes.

He first compares the seasonal influenza IFR (up to 0.1%) to early model
predictions of the Covid19 IFR. But these early model predictions turned
out to be [completely
unrealistic](https://swprs.org/studies-on-covid-19-lethality/) (see
above). Besides, even the US CDC in May reduced its (still conservative)
best-estimate Covid IFR [to
just 0.26%](https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/planning-scenarios.html).

He then claims antibody studies in Brazil and Spain showed an IFR of 1%
or more. But they didn’t: the professor confuses the so-called **“crude
IFR”** (deaths divided by infections in a study group) with the
**population-based IFR**, which is adjusted for the age and risk profile
of a population.

This distinction is crucial, as Covid-19 mostly affects elderly high
risk groups: in fact, 40% to 80% of “Covid-related” deaths [occurred in
nursing
homes](https://swprs.org/studies-on-covid-19-lethality/#care-homes). But
if ten of one hundred nursing patients die, this doesn’t mean 10% of the
whole population will die.

As an example, the famous **Diamond Princess** cruise ship with its
mostly elderly passengers had a crude IFR of about 1.5%. Based on this
value, Stanford professor John Ioannidis, already in March, calculated a
population-based Covid IFR [of
about 0.13%](https://www.statnews.com/2020/03/17/a-fiasco-in-the-making-as-the-coronavirus-pandemic-takes-hold-we-are-making-decisions-without-reliable-data/)
for the US society as a whole.

The German professor does mention the German antibody study of the
Gangelt hotspot which showed a population-based IFR of 0.36%. The
professor doesn’t mention, however, that this [was an upper
bound](https://swprs.org/studies-on-covid-19-lethality/): the adjusted
IFR was 0.27% and the median age of death was 81 years.

Most antibody studies showed a population-based IFR [between 0.1%
and 0.3%](https://swprs.org/studies-on-covid-19-lethality/), which is
comparable to a severe influenza. In fact, for people under 50, the
Covid19 IFR is *rather lower* than for influenza. A few hotspots did
show locally higher IFRs of up to 0.7%, but these places usually were
affected by a collapse in elderly care due to infections or panic.

More recently, immunological research has revealed that serological
(i.e. blood) antibody studies [detect at most 20% of
infections](https://swprs.org/coronavirus-antibody-tests-show-only-one-fifth-of-infections/),
as most people neutralize the coronavirus with their mucosal or cellular
immune system without even needing to develop (permanent) antibodies in
the blood.

This means the real Covid19 IFR may drop **well below 0.1%** and thus
into the range of seasonal influenza. It also means Covid19 “immunity
passports” and mandatory vaccines won’t work. And it explains why even
hotspots like NYC and Stockholm found antibody values no higher than
20%.

Despite its rather low lethality (IFR), **mortality** can still reach
locally and temporarily very high levels if the coronavirus is spreading
fast and manages to infect high risk groups in care homes and hospitals,
as indeed happened in many hotspots like northern Italy or eastern
France.

But even so, **cumulative all-cause mortality** since the beginning of
the year even in hard-hit countries like the US and the UK or in Sweden
(without a lockdown) remained [in the range of a strong influenza
season](https://swprs.org/studies-on-covid-19-lethality/#overall-mortality).
Countries like Germany and Switzerland saw a mild “influenza season”.

The following chart shows that global Covid-19 mortality is comparable
to the notorious Swine Flu
[“non-pandemic”](https://www.forbes.com/2010/02/05/world-health-organization-swine-flu-pandemic-opinions-contributors-michael-fumento.html)
of 2009/10 and remains an order of magnitude below the flu pandemics of
1957 (Asian flu) and 1968 (Hong Kong flu). These were serious, but life
[still went on as
normal](https://nypost.com/2020/05/16/why-life-went-on-as-normal-during-the-killer-pandemic-of-1969/).

Importantly, while these death rates are population-adjusted, they
aren’t even age-adjusted: the age group most affected by Covid-19
today (80+) hardly existed back in the 1950s. Hence adjusting for age
would make Covid-19 look even less dramatic in comparison.

In contrast, the UN warns that due to the unprecedented **political
response** to Covid-19, half of the world’s workers or **1.6 billion
people** are now at [immediate risk of losing their
livelihood](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/apr/29/half-of-worlds-workers-at-immediate-risk-of-losing-livelihood-due-to-coronavirus).
In the US alone there are already [46 million unemployment
claims](https://www.businessinsider.com/us-weekly-jobless-claims-unemployment-insurance-filings-economy-coronavirus-recession-2020-6).

**See also**: [Facts about
Covid-19](https://swprs.org/a-swiss-doctor-on-covid-19/)

![Covid-19 death toll compared to earlier epidemics and pandemics ([DB
Research](https://www.dbresearch.com/servlet/reweb2.ReWEB?rwsite=RPS_EN-PROD&rwobj=ReDisplay.Start.class&document=PROD0000000000509478))](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/06/covid-19-comparison-e1592927192181.png?w=736&h=600)

-----

**Share on**:
[Twitter](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?url=https://swprs.org/covid19-lethality-how-not-to-do-it/)
/
[Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/share.php?u=https://swprs.org/covid19-lethality-how-not-to-do-it/)

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div id="footer" class="footer bg-graphite">

<div class="section-inner row clear" data-role="complementary">

<div class="column column-1 one-third medium-padding">

<div class="widgets">

<div id="nav_menu-3" class="widget widget_nav_menu">

<div class="widget-content clear">

### Swiss Policy Research

<div class="menu-allgemein-container">

  - <span id="menu-item-251">[Kontakt](https://swprs.org/kontakt/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-33090">[Übersicht](https://swprs.org/uebersicht/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-33286">[Donationen](https://swprs.org/donationen/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-15372">[Disclaimer](https://swprs.org/disclaimer/)</span>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="column column-2 one-third medium-padding">

<div class="widgets">

<div id="nav_menu-4" class="widget widget_nav_menu">

<div class="widget-content clear">

### English

<div class="menu-english-container">

  - <span id="menu-item-20017">[About Us /
    Contact](https://swprs.org/contact/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-20015">[The Media
    Navigator](https://swprs.org/media-navigator/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-20016">[The CFR and the
    Media](https://swprs.org/the-american-empire-and-its-media/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-33285">[Donations](https://swprs.org/donations/)</span>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="column column-3 one-third medium-padding">

<div class="widgets">

<div id="blog_subscription-4" class="widget widget_blog_subscription jetpack_subscription_widget">

<div class="widget-content clear">

### Follow by email

Follow

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="credits section bg-dark small-padding">

<div class="credits-inner section-inner clear">

[WordPress.com](https://wordpress.com/?ref=footer_custom_com).

[Up ↑](# "To the top")

</div>

</div>

<div style="display:none">

</div>

<div id="carousel-reblog-box">

Post to

<div class="submit">

<span class="canceltext">[Cancel](#)</span>

</div>

<div class="arrow">

</div>

</div>

![](https://pixel.wp.com/b.gif?v=noscript)
