[Skip to
content](#content)

[](https://swprs.org/)

<div class="cover">

</div>

[Search](#search-container)

<div id="search-container" class="header-search-block bg-graphite hidden">

<span class="screen-reader-text">Search for:</span>

</div>

<div class="header-inner section-inner">

[![Swiss Policy Research
Logo](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/05/swiss-policy-research-logo-300.png)](https://swprs.org/)

[Swiss Policy Research](https://swprs.org/)

Geopolitics and
    Media

</div>

<div class="navigation section no-padding bg-dark">

Menu

<div class="main-navigation">

  - <span id="menu-item-4374">[Start](https://swprs.org)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-5941">[Studien](https://swprs.org/srf-propaganda-analyse/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-4361">[SRF /
        ZDF](https://swprs.org/srf-propaganda-analyse/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-4359">[NZZ-Studie](https://swprs.org/die-nzz-studie/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-4373">[Agenturen](https://swprs.org/der-propaganda-multiplikator/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-7978">[Medienmatrix](https://swprs.org/die-propaganda-matrix/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-9423">[Analysen](https://swprs.org/medien-navigator/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-9414">[Navigator](https://swprs.org/medien-navigator/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-8524">[Techniken](https://swprs.org/der-propaganda-schluessel/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-10908">[Wikipedia](https://swprs.org/propaganda-in-der-wikipedia/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-9920">[Kriege](https://swprs.org/logik-imperialer-kriege/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-4362">[Netzwerke](https://swprs.org/netzwerk-medien-schweiz/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-6283">[Schweiz](https://swprs.org/netzwerk-medien-schweiz/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-7215">[Deutschland](https://swprs.org/netzwerk-medien-deutschland/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-17401">[Österreich](https://swprs.org/medien-in-oesterreich/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-7216">[USA](https://swprs.org/das-american-empire-und-seine-medien/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-9228">[Fokus
    I](https://swprs.org/bericht-eines-journalisten/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-12119">[Journalistenbericht](https://swprs.org/bericht-eines-journalisten/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-12117">[Russische
        Propaganda](https://swprs.org/russische-propaganda/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-12118">[Die
        »Israel-Lobby«](https://swprs.org/die-israel-lobby-fakten-und-mythen/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-13505">[Pädokriminalität](https://swprs.org/geopolitik-und-paedokriminalitaet/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-17258">[Fokus
    II](https://swprs.org/migration-und-medien/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-32838">[Coronavirus](https://swprs.org/covid-19-hinweis-ii/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-12939">[Integrity
        Initiative](https://swprs.org/die-integrity-initiative/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-17290">[Migration &
        Medien](https://swprs.org/migration-und-medien/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-17291">[Magnitsky
        Act](https://swprs.org/der-fall-magnitsky/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-21964">[Projekt](https://swprs.org/kontakt/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-8525">[Kontakt](https://swprs.org/kontakt/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-10193">[Seitenübersicht](https://swprs.org/uebersicht/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-8637">[Medienspiegel](https://swprs.org/medienspiegel/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-33287">[Donationen](https://swprs.org/donationen/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-14415">[English](https://swprs.org/contact/)</span>

</div>

[Open
Search](#)

</div>

<div class="wrapper section medium-padding">

<div class="section-inner clear" data-role="main">

<div id="content" class="content clear center">

# Facts about Covid-19 (archive)

<div class="post-content clear">

#### [Main article: Facts about Covid-19](https://swprs.org/a-swiss-doctor-on-covid-19/)

#### May 2020

##### **Expert interviews  
**

  - Stanford professor **John Ioannidis** explains [in an interview with
    CNN](https://twitter.com/cnn/status/1256579248342564865) that
    Covid19 is a “widespread and mild disease” comparable to influenza
    (flu) for the general population, while patients in nursing homes
    and hospitals should receive extra protection.
  - Stanford professor **Scott Atlas** explains [in an interview with
    CNN](https://www.facebook.com/cnn/posts/10160799274796509) that “the
    idea of having to stop Covid19 has created a catastrophic health
    care situation”. Professor Atlas says that the disease is “generally
    mild” and that irrational fears had been created. He adds that there
    is “absolutely no reason” for extensive testing in the general
    population, which is only necessary in hospitals and nursing homes.
    Professor Atlas wrote an article at the end of April entitled[“The
    data are in – Stop the panic and end total
    isolation”](https://thehill.com/opinion/healthcare/494034-the-data-are-in-stop-the-panic-and-end-the-total-isolation)
    that received over 15,000 comments.
  - Epidemiologist **Dr Knut Wittkowski** [explains in a new
    interview](https://www.thepressandthepublic.com/post/perspectives-on-the-pandemic-v)
    that the danger of Covid19 is comparable to an influenza and that
    the peak was already passed in most countries before the lockdown.
    The lockdown of entire societies was a “catastrophic decision”
    without benefits but causing enormous damage. The most important
    measure is the protection of nursing homes. According to Dr.
    Wittkowski, Bill Gates’ statements on Covid19 are “absurd” and “have
    nothing to do with reality”. Dr. Wittkowski considers a vaccination
    against Covid19 “not necessary” and the influential Covid19 model of
    British epidemiologist Neil Ferguson a “complete failure”.
    (**Note**: The video was removed by Youtube).
  - German virologist **Hendrik Streeck** [explains the final
    results](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vrL9QKGQrWk) of his
    pioneering antibody study. Professor Streeck found a Covid19
    lethality of 0.36%, but explains that this is an upper limit and the
    lethality is probably in the range of 0.24 to 0.26% or even below.
    The average age of test-positive deceased was approximately 81
    years. Professor Streeck argues that “waiting for a vaccine” is not
    a good strategy because both the feasibility and effectiveness of a
    vaccine are uncertain.
  - Biology professor and Nobel Prize winner **Michael Levitt**, who has
    been analyzing the spread of Covid19 since February, describes the
    general lockdown as [a „huge
    mistake“](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bl-sZdfLcEk) and calls
    for more targeted measures, especially to protect risk groups.
  - The emeritus microbiology professor **Sucharit Bhakdi** explains [in
    a new interview](https://www.servustv.com/videos/aa-23zjmvcz51w12/)
    that politics and the media have been conducting an “intolerable
    fear-mongering” and an “irres­pon­sible disinformation campaign”.
    According to professor Bhakdi, face masks for the general population
    are not needed and may in fact be harmful “germ catchers”. The
    current crisis was brought about by the politicians themselves and
    has little to do with the virus, he argues, while a vaccine against
    coronavirus is “unnecessary and dangerous”, as was already the case
    with swine flu. The WHO has “never taken responsibility for its many
    wrong decisions over the years”, professor Bhakdi adds. (**Note**:
    The video was temporarily deleted by YouTube).
  - The Swiss chief physician for infectiology, **Dr. Pietro Vernazza**,
    explains [in a new
    interview](https://www.saldo.ch/artikel/artikeldetail/fuer-die-allermeisten-menschen-verlaeuft-die-erkrankung-mild/)
    that the Covid19 disease is “mild for the vast majority of people”
    and the “counting of infected people and the call for more tests”
    aren’t helpful. In addition, most of the people listed in the corona
    statistics did not die solely from Covid-19. According to Dr.
    Vernazza, there is no evidence for the benefit of face masks in
    people who do not show symptoms themselves
    ([archive](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/05/saldo-interview-pietro-vernazza-14-04-2020.pdf)).

##### **Medical studies**

  - A [new overview of existing PCR and antibody
    studies](https://swprs.org/studies-on-covid-19-lethality/) shows
    that the median value of Covid19 lethality (IFR) is about 0.2% and
    thus in the range of a strong influenza.
  - A new [antibody study with Danish blood
    donors](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.04.24.20075291v1)
    showed a very low Covid19 lethality (IFR) of 0.08% for persons under
    70 years of age.
  - A [new antibody
    study](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.04.26.20079244v1)
    from Iran, one of the earliest and most affected countries by
    Covid19, also showed a very low lethality of 0.08% to 0.12%.
  - A new [antibody study from
    Japan](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.04.26.20079822v1)
    comes to the conclusion that about 400 to 800 times more people
    there had contact with the new coronavirus than previously thought,
    but showed no or hardly any symptoms. Japan had done rather few
    tests so far.
  - A [new study from
    Germany](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.04.17.20061440v1),
    with the participation of leading virologist Christian Drosten,
    shows that about one third of the population already has some
    **cellular immunity** to the Covid19 corona virus, presumably
    through contact with earlier corona viruses (cold viruses). This
    cellular immunity by so-called T-cells is significantly higher than
    PCR and antibody tests suggested and may partly explain why many
    people develop no symptoms with the new coronavirus.
  - In a prison in the US state of Tennessee, only two out of 1349
    test-positive people [showed any
    symptoms](https://www.tennessean.com/story/news/politics/2020/05/01/tennessee-testing-all-inmates-prison-staff-after-multiple-outbreaks/3067388001/)
    at all.
  - On the French **aircraft carrier** Charles de Gaulle,
    [none](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/COVID-19_pandemic_on_Charles_de_Gaulle)
    of 1046 test-positive sailors have died so far. On the US aircraft
    carrier Theodore Roosevelt,
    [one](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/COVID-19_pandemic_on_USS_Theodore_Roosevelt)
    of 969 test-positive sailors has died so far (preconditions and
    exact cause of death are not known). This yields a lethality rate of
    0 to 0.1% for this population group.
  - Numerous media reported about alleged **“re-infections”** of already
    recovered persons in South Korea. However, researchers have now
    [come to the
    conclusion](https://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/asia/coronavirus-south-korea-patients-infected-twice-test-a9491986.html)
    that all of the 290 suspected cases were *false-positive test
    results* caused by “non-infectious virus fragments”. The result
    again highlights the [well-known
    unreliability](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32219885) of PCR
    virus tests.

##### **Other medical updates**

  - Numerous media reported that in connection with Covid19, more and
    more children would fall ill with so-called **Kawasaki disease** (a
    vascular inflammation). However, the UK’s Kawasaki Disease
    Foundation issued a [press release
    stating](https://www.societi.org.uk/kawasaki-disease-and-covid-19/)
    that *fewer, not more,* Kawasaki cases are currently being reported
    than usual and that of the few cases reported, only about half had
    tested positive for corona virus.
  - In an [open letter to the French Ministry of
    Health](https://covidinfos.net/covid19/la-lettre-dun-praticien-hospitalier-adressee-au-ministere-de-la-sante-denonce-une-arnaque-sanitaire/604/),
    a **French doctor** speaks of Covid19 as “the biggest health scam of
    the 21st century”. The danger of the virus for the general
    population is in the range of influenza and the consequences of the
    lockdown are more dangerous than the virus itself, the French doctor
    argues.
  - In **France**, it became known during a subsequent investigation
    that the first Covid19-positive patient had already been treated [at
    the end of
    December 2019](https://www.reuters.com/article/us-health-coronavirus-france-retests/frances-early-covid-19-case-may-hold-clues-to-pandemics-start-idUSKBN22H15R),
    one month earlier than previously assumed. The man was being treated
    for what appeared to be flu-related pneumonia. This case shows that
    the new corona virus either arrived in Europe earlier than assumed,
    or that it is not as new as assumed, or that the test result was a
    false-positive. In addition, it is not clear whether the man, who
    has long since recovered, was actually suffering from flu or corona
    virus or both.
  - The Executive Director of the WHO recently praised **Sweden** as [a
    successful
    model](https://nypost.com/2020/04/29/who-lauds-sweden-as-model-for-resisting-coronavirus-lockdown/)
    for handling Covid19. Sweden had implemented its health policy
    successfully and “in partnership with the population”, he said.
    Previously, Sweden had been heavily criticized for weeks by foreign
    media and politicians for its relaxed approach to Covid19.
  - **Belarus**, which took the least action against Covid19 of all
    European countries and did not even cancel major events like soccer
    matches, is counting only 103 test-positive or suspected [Covid19
    deaths](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/COVID-19_pandemic_in_Belarus)
    after more than two months. The Belarusian long-term president
    Lukashenko called Corona [a
    “psychosis”](https://www.baltictimes.com/lukashenko__coronavirus_is_psychosis/).
    Critics argue he is not disclosing the real number of deaths.
  - An [extensive literature
    review](https://covidinfos.net/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/MasksDon-twork-4.pdf)
    by a Canadian researcher found that **face masks** do not provide
    measurable protection against colds and influenza.
  - A Swiss chief psychiatrist expects a sharp increase in
    **psychological problems** and [more than 10,000 additional
    suicides](https://www.aargauerzeitung.ch/aargau/kanton-aargau/aargauer-psychiatrie-chefarzt-kawohl-warnt-arbeitslosigkeit-erhoeht-das-suizidrisiko-137742663)
    worldwide due to the global lockdown and unemployment.
  - The so-called **reproduction number**, which indicates the
    proliferation of Covid, is increasingly becoming [a political
    issue](https://www.tagesschau.de/faktenfinder/corona-reproduktionszahl-101.html).
    However, this does not change the facts: the peak of the spread was
    already reached in most countries before the lockdown and the
    reproduction ratio fell to or below the stable value of one due to
    simple everyday and hygiene measures. The lockdown was therefore
    epidemiologically
    [unnecessary](https://infekt.ch/2020/04/sind-wir-tatsaechlich-im-blindflug/).
  - The **clinical picture and risk groups** of Covid19 corona viruses
    are probably related to the use of the so-called [ACE2 cell
    receptor](https://www.news-medical.net/news/20200420/ACE2-TMPRSS2-profiling-indicates-tissue-vulnerability-to-SARS-CoV-2-infection.aspx),
    which is found in the bronchi and lungs, but also in blood vessels,
    the intestines and kidneys. However, other coronaviruses such as the
    [common cold virus
    NL63](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4369385/), also
    use the ACE2 cell receptor. Some researchers therefore [expect
    that](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7074995/) the
    Covid19 coronavirus, too, will be seen as a typical cold virus in
    the medium term.
  - The exact **origin of the new corona virus** is still unclear. The
    easiest explanation remains natural transmission or mutation, which
    happens quite often. It is true, however, that the virological
    laboratory in Wuhan, as part of a [research programme co-financed by
    the
    US](https://www.newsweek.com/dr-fauci-backed-controversial-wuhan-lab-millions-us-dollars-risky-coronavirus-research-1500741),
    studied corona viruses from bats and also examined their
    transmissibility to other mammals, something that has been
    criticised for years by some researchers as too risky. The director
    of the laboratory, however, explained that the new virus [did not
    correspond](https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/how-chinas-bat-woman-hunted-down-viruses-from-sars-to-the-new-coronavirus1/)
    to the corona viruses investigated in the laboratory. At any rate,
    earlier rumours about “bioweapons” or “HIV sequences” turned out to
    be
    [disinformation](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/eci.13222)
    given the relative harmlessness of the corona virus.

##### **Nursing Homes**

Nursing homes play an [absolutely key
role](https://ltccovid.org/2020/04/12/mortality-associated-with-covid-19-outbreaks-in-care-homes-early-international-evidence/)
in the current corona situation. In most Western countries, 30% to 70%
of all deaths “related to Covid” occurred in nursing homes (in some
regions even up to 90%). It is also known from northern Italy that the
crisis there began with a [panic-induced collapse of nursing care for
the elderly](https://swprs.org/covid-19-a-report-from-italy/).

Nursing homes require targeted protection and do not benefit from a
general lockdown of society. If one looks only at the deaths in the
general population, in most countries these are in the range of a normal
or even mild wave of influenza.

Moreover, in many cases it is not clear what people in nursing homes
really died of, i.e. whether it was Covid19 or stress, fear and
loneliness. From Belgium, for example, it is known that
[about 94%](https://web.archive.org/web/20200424212535/https://covid-19.sciensano.be/sites/default/files/Covid19/Meest%20recente%20update.pdf)
of all deaths in nursing homes are untested “presumed cases”.

A [new analysis of French
statistics](https://covidinfos.net/covid19/deces-dus-au-covid-19-le-nombre-officiel-de-morts-en-france-est-il-surestime/502/)
moreover shows the following: as soon as there is a “suspected case” in
a nursing home (e.g. due to coughing), all deaths are considered
“suspected Covid19 deaths”, and as soon as there is a “confirmed case”
in a nursing home (even if symptomless), all deaths are considered
“confirmed Covid19 deaths”.

A report from Germany vividly describes the [extreme
conditions](https://www.rnd.de/gesundheit/corona-ist-mir-egal-warum-helga-witt-kronshage-86-lieber-sterben-will-als-eingesperrt-zu-sein-3MEBDIOBEFA6BDULC4N5WGZJG4.html)
under which hundreds of thousands of patients in care and nursing homes
have had to live in recent weeks, often against their will. Many of the
patients were barely allowed to leave their rooms, were no longer
allowed to go out into the fresh air or receive visits from their
relatives.

In several nursing homes, the error-prone PCR virus test moreover led to
[serious false
alarms](https://www.wjhl.com/local-coronavirus-coverage/agape-nursing-home-says-residents-who-tested-positive-for-covid-19-were-false-positives/)
and panic. In one Canadian nursing home, employees fled in fear of the
corona virus, resulting in the [tragic death of 31
patients](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/16/world/canada/montreal-nursing-homes-coronavirus.html)
due to lack of care.

The former New York Times journalist and Corona critic Alex Berenson
[writes on
Twitter](https://twitter.com/AlexBerenson/status/1257496834043531267):
“Let’s be clear: the fact the nursing home deaths are not front and
center every day in elite media coverage of COVID tells you everything
you need to know about the media’s priority – which is instilling panic
(and punishing Trump), not driving good health policy.”

**Full analysis**: [Mortality associated with COVID-19 outbreaks in care
homes: early international
evidence](https://ltccovid.org/2020/04/12/mortality-associated-with-covid-19-outbreaks-in-care-homes-early-international-evidence/)
(LTC Covid, May 2020)

![Deaths in nursing homes, absolute and percentage figures (LTC
Covid)](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/05/care-homes-covid.png?w=650&h=429)

##### **Great Britain**

  - Cumulative all-cause mortality in the UK remains [in the range of
    the five strongest flu waves](http://inproportion2.talkigy.com/) in
    the last 25 years. The peak in daily hospital deaths was already
    reached on April 8 (s. chart below).
  - New [statistical data
    show](https://www.telegraph.co.uk/politics/2020/05/01/evidence-rising-britains-lockdown-could-deadly-mistake/)
    that in mid-April, out of about 12,000 additional deaths, about
    9,000 were “related to Covid” (including “suspected cases”), but
    about 3,000 were “not related to Covid”. Moreover, of the total of
    about 7300 deaths in nursing homes, only about 2000 were “related to
    Covid”. In both the “Covid19 deaths” and the non-covid19 deaths, it
    is [often
    unclear](https://www.hsj.co.uk/commissioning/thousands-of-extra-deaths-outside-hospital-not-attributed-to-covid-19/7027459.article)
    what these people actually died of. The Association of British
    Pathologists has therefore called for a [“systematic review of the
    true causes of
    death”](https://www.hsj.co.uk/coronavirus/systematic-reviews-to-discover-true-cause-of-outbreak-deaths/7027491.article).
  - The temporary “Nightingale” hospitals in the UK have so far
    [remained largely
    empty](https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/0/do-many-nhs-nightingale-hospitals-remain-empty/).
    A similar situation was already seen in China, the US and many other
    countries.
  - At the end of April it became known that the lockdown was apparently
    not, as officially stated, recommended by a scientific commission
    alone, but that a high government advisor [had “pushed” the
    scientists](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-04-28/top-aide-to-u-k-s-johnson-pushed-scientists-to-back-lockdown)
    to support the lockdown.
  - Peter Hitchens: [We’re destroying the nation’s wealth – and the
    health of
    millions](https://hitchensblog.mailonsunday.co.uk/2020/05/peter-hitchens-were-destroying-the-nations-wealth-and-the-health-of-millions.html).
    “If you don’t defend your most basic freedom, the one to go lawfully
    where you wish when you wish, then you will lose it for ever. And
    that is not all you will lose. Look at the censorship of the
    internet, spreading like a great dark blot, the death of Parliament,
    the conversion of the police into a state militia.”

![England: Test-positive deaths in hosptials
([NHS](https://www.england.nhs.uk/statistics/statistical-work-areas/covid-19-daily-deaths/))](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/05/england-deaths.png?w=736&h=457)

##### **United States**

  - The [latest report from the US
    CDC](https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/covid-data/covidview/index.html)
    shows that the Covid19 hospitalization rate among the over-65s is in
    the range of strong flu waves. It is slightly higher among 18 to
    64-year-olds and significantly lower among those under 18.
  - **Video**: A nurse from New York City [stated in a dramatic
    video](https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-8262351/Nurse-New-York-claims-city-killing-COVID-19-patients-putting-ventilators.html)
    that New York is “killing” Covid19 patients by putting them on
    invasive ventilators and destroying their lungs. The use of the
    invasive ventilators (instead of oxygen masks) is done “for fear of
    spreading the virus”. It is “a horror movie”, “not because of the
    disease, but because of the way it is dealt with”, the nurse
    explained. Experts [have been
    warning](https://off-guardian.org/2020/05/06/covid19-are-ventilators-killing-people/)
    since March against intubation of Covid19 patients.
  - Dr. Daniel Murphy, the head of emergency medicine at a heavily
    affected hospital in New York City, [recommends a quick
    end](https://nypost.com/2020/04/27/ive-worked-the-coronavirus-front-line-and-i-say-its-time-to-start-opening-up/)
    to the lockdown. According to Dr Murphy, the Covid19 wave had
    already reached its peak on April 7th. Covid19 is a serious matter,
    but the fear of it is exaggerated, as the vast majority of the
    population gets at most mildly ill. His biggest concern now is the
    sharp decline in the care of emergency patients and children due to
    the lockdown and the widespread fear in the population.
  - **Video**: The conservative Project Veritas whistleblower platform
    [spoke with New York funeral home
    directors](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g5f_6ltv7oI) who stated
    that currently Covid is written “on all death certificates” (of
    suspected cases), whether there was a test or not. Many people are
    currently dying at home, and often the exact cause of death is no
    longer checked. The Covid19 statistics are inflated for political or
    financial reasons, the directors stated.
  - The director of the Illinois Department of Health [confirmed
    that](https://week.com/2020/04/20/idph-director-explains-how-covid-deaths-are-classified/)
    even terminally ill people who clearly die of another cause but who
    test positive for Covid19 virus before or after death are recorded
    as Covid19 deaths.
  - Due to the lockdown, 30 million people in the US have already
    [applied for unemployment
    benefits](https://edition.cnn.com/2020/04/30/economy/unemployment-benefits-coronavirus/index.html)
    by the end of April – that is significantly more than the
    International Labour Office ILO originally assumed for the entire
    world.
  - Tesla boss Elon Musk called the California curfews
    [“fascist”](https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2020/apr/29/tesla-quarterly-earnings-coronavirus-shares).
    The “forced imprisonment” of people in their homes violates all
    their constitutional rights, Musk explained in a telephone
    conference.
  - **Video**: A Wisconsin mother was[confronted by
    police](https://twitter.com/AlexBerenson/status/1256219418343981056)
    at her home because her children played illegally with neighbor
    children.
  - **Video**: In late April, some photographers were caught in a
    [partial staging of a
    protest](https://twitter.com/talialikeitis/status/1253126254942773248)
    by care workers against anti-lockdown demonstrators. ([Read
    more](https://www.buzzfeednews.com/article/tasneemnashrulla/photos-denver-nurses-block-anti-lockdown-protest)).

##### **Switzerland**

  - Cumulative deaths since the beginning of the year in Switzerland
    remain within the range [of a normal flu
    epidemic](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/05/schweiz-todesfaelle-2010-2020_woche_17.pdf)
    and far below the strong flu epidemic of 2015 (see graph below).
    Around [50% of
    deaths](https://www.bluewin.ch/de/news/schweiz/sp-chef-levrat-will-die-reichen-schropfen-383977.html)
    occurred in care and nursing homes.
  - The Swiss government plans to transform the current corona emergency
    decrees into a [permanent urgent federal
    law](https://www.admin.ch/gov/de/start/dokumentation/medienmitteilungen.msg-id-78929.html).
    Most Swiss media have not reported on this far-reaching
    announcement, or have done so only marginally.
  - The Swiss Armed Forces began [testing an app for contact
    tracing](https://uncut-news.ch/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/Schweizer-Soldaten-k%C3%A4mpfen-bewaffnet-mit-Bluetooth-App-gegen-COVID-19.pdf)
    that is to be introduced on 11 May in collaboration with Google and
    Apple. Meanwhile, a Swiss “data protection office”
    [declared](https://www.nzz.ch/zuerich/coronavirus-in-zuerich-tracing-app-braucht-keine-freiwilligkeit-ld.1553964):
    “If the contact tracing app is suitable and necessary, it does not
    need to be voluntary”.
  - Various vigils [were held on the Swiss Bundesplatz in
    Berne](https://www.zeitpunkt.ch/index.php/mahnwache-fuer-grundrechte-400-menschen-auf-dem-bundesplatz-wie-aus-dem-nichts)
    with around 400 participants who spoke out against restrictions on
    constitutional rights. The rallies were cleared by the police.
  - In the context of Covid19, it was not the long-established [Swiss
    Pandemic
    Commission](https://www.srf.ch/news/schweiz/bag-verzichtete-auf-beratung-was-macht-die-pandemie-kommission-in-der-krise)
    that was used, but a newly founded [“Covid-19 Task
    Force”](https://ncs-tf.ch/de/organisation), some of whose members
    have conflicts of interest in the pharmaceutical sector.
  - **Video**: [“Does the Swiss government belong in
    prison?”](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RyZGkdeQ6CY) Swiss
    journalist Reto Brennwald interviewed the entrepreneur [Daniel
    Stricker](https://www.youtube.com/user/timturpis/videos), who
    temporarily fled Switzerland to Sweden in mid-March and strongly
    criticizes the corona policy of the Swiss government.
  - A Swiss nurse has written a [highly shared
    article](https://www.facebook.com/simone.christinat/posts/10221314943115981)
    on the current situation. She explains that Swiss hospitals have
    remained largely empty and in some cases had to furlough staff. She
    also says it is very unusual to transfer people over 80 years of age
    to intensive care units because of flu or pneumonia, where they then
    have to die alone instead of with their families. If this were done,
    the intensive care units would be overloaded almost every winter.
    The nurse criticises that most of the media have not sufficiently
    addressed the recent scientific findings on the rather low overall
    risk of Covid19.

![Cumulative deaths compared to expected deaths, 2010 to 2020 (KW17,
BFS/Stotz)](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/05/schweiz-todesfaelle-2010-2020_woche_17-1.png?w=736&h=347)

##### **Germany and Austria**

  - In Germany and Austria, similar to Denmark, Finland, Greece,
    Hungary, Ireland, Luxembourg, Malta, Norway and Portugal, [no excess
    mortality exists](https://www.euromomo.eu/graphs-and-maps/) to date.
  - According to a leaked protocol of the Austrian Corona Task Force,
    Chancellor Kurz is said to have demanded in March that the
    population should be [“more
    afraid”](https://www.derstandard.de/story/2000117131591/sitzungsprotokoll-der-taskforce-corona-ueber-zu-wenig-angst-in-der)
    of infection or death of parents or grandparents. A strategy paper
    of the German Federal Ministry of the Interior had already [become
    known
    earlier](https://fragdenstaat.de/dokumente/4123-wie-wir-covid-19-unter-kontrolle-bekommen/),
    which also called for a psychological fear campaign that was indeed
    implemented by politicians and the media. In retrospect, the
    question arises as to how many people died as a result of this
    largely unfounded fear.
  - An open letter with already about 5000 signatures from people over
    64 years of age
    [demands](https://www.change.org/p/bundeskanzlerin-corona-sch%C3%BCtzen-sie-%C3%A4ltere-nicht-um-diesen-preis-selbstbestimmt-altern-und-sterben):
    “Corona: Don’t protect us older people at this price\! Let us decide
    for ourselves\!” For the protection of risk groups, the basic rights
    of the entire society should not be overridden, the authors argue.
  - In Austria (and possibly also in other countries) kissing among
    people in love but not living together is [still
    forbidden](https://www.unsertirol24.com/2020/04/29/oeffentliches-kuessen-wird-unter-strafe-gestellt/).
    This applies both in public and in one’s own flat, explained the
    Austrian Minister of Health.
  - A German lawyer is currently suing in several courts against the
    government anti-corona measures, as they are [“blatantly
    unconstitutional”](https://www.rubikon.news/artikel/eklatant-verfassungswidrig-2).
  - **Videos**: In Germany there have recently been several cases of
    serious police overreach. A young woman was [brutally
    arrested](https://web.archive.org/web/20200509235301/https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TZrKv4-jkK8)
    by several police officers while shopping, as she had apparently
    “got 20cm too close” to a policewoman. Another woman [was
    instructed by the
    police](https://twitter.com/ChristianFritze/status/1256609660318224385)
    at a rally not to hold the German constitution in front of her
    chest, as this was an “illegal political message”. The organizer of
    a peaceful rally in Berlin was also arrested in a [rather brutal
    fashion](https://web.archive.org/web/20200506155035/https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NbV2OH3uYxI).
    Even older women were arrested in a [disproportionate
    manner](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Bn11jXTjh_Y). (**Caution**:
    disturbing footage of police violence).

##### **Other updates**

  - The CEO of Youtube announced in an interview at the end of April
    that video contributions on coronavirus that contradict the
    guidelines of the WHO or national health authorities [will be
    removed](https://www.businessinsider.com/youtube-will-ban-anything-against-who-guidance-2020-4).
    For example, the video of the two skeptic Californian emergency
    doctors, which had over five million views, [was
    deleted](https://www.turnto23.com/news/coronavirus/video-interview-with-dr-dan-erickson-and-dr-artin-massihi-taken-down-from-youtube).
    Likewise, the interview with Professor Sucharit Bhakdi linked above
    was at least temporarily removed by Youtube.
  - In the US magazine The Atlantic, two law professors wrote [an
    article
    entitled](https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2020/04/what-covid-revealed-about-internet/610549/):
    “Internet Speech Will Never Go Back to Normal. In the debate over
    freedom versus control of the global network, China was largely
    correct, and the U.S. was wrong.”
  - Mathias Döpfner, CEO of Axel Springer and one of the most
    influential media managers in Germany, calls for a [“decoupling from
    China”](https://www.german-foreign-policy.com/news/detail/8263/) and
    a strengthening of the transatlantic alliance with the USA in the
    wake of the Corona crisis.
  - Washington Post: [“The last time the government sought a ‘warp
    speed’ vaccine, it was a
    fiasco”](https://www.washingtonpost.com/history/2020/05/01/vaccine-swine-flu-coronavirus/).
    The 1976 swine flu express vaccination led to paralysis and deaths.
  - Looking back: [Woodstock Occurred in the Middle of a
    Pandemic](https://www.aier.org/article/woodstock-occurred-in-the-middle-of-a-pandemic/).
    On the rather relaxed handling of the global flu pandemic of 1968
    ([read
    more](https://www.britannica.com/event/Hong-Kong-flu-of-1968)).

##### **Covid-19 and the media**

A lot of people are shocked by the dubious and often fear-mongering
Covid19 reporting of many media outlets. Obviously, this is not
“ordinary reporting”, but classical and massive propaganda, as it is
typically employed in connection with [wars of
aggression](https://swprs.org/propaganda-in-the-war-on-yugoslavia/) or
alleged
[terrorism](https://www.motherjones.com/politics/2013/01/terror-factory-fbi-trevor-aaronson-book/).

SPR has depicted the media networks responsible for the dissemination of
such propaganda in earlier infographics [for the
USA](https://swprs.org/the-american-empire-and-its-media/), for
[Germany](https://swprs.org/netzwerk-medien-deutschland/) and for
[Switzerland](https://swprs.org/netzwerk-medien-schweiz/). Even the
supposedly “open” Internet lexicon Wikipedia is [an integral
part](https://swprs.org/wikipedia-disinformation-operation/) of this
geopolitical media structure.

The political stance and relationship to power of different media
outlets have been analyzed and compared as part of the [SPR Media
Navigator](https://swprs.org/media-navigator/). The Media Navigator may
also be helpful in evaluating the current Covid19 reporting by different
media outlets.

If, for example, pictures of soldiers in protective suits disinfecting
entire streets are seen on television, this does not prove the danger of
the corona virus, but rather – as Professor Giesecke [put it
benevolently](https://www.addendum.org/coronavirus/interview-johan-giesecke/)
– proves useless “political activism”. Or as others would put it:
propaganda.

##### **Covid-19 and mass surveillance**

By far the most significant and, from a civil society perspective, the
most dangerous development in response to the coronavirus is the
apparent political attempt to massively expand mass surveillance and
control of society. In this context, NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden
warned of the emergence of an [“architecture of
oppression”](https://www.vice.com/en_us/article/bvge5q/snowden-warns-governments-are-using-coronavirus-to-build-the-architecture-of-oppression).

The flu-like coronavirus may serve as a rationale or pretext for the
introduction of [strategic
measures](https://norberthaering.de/die-regenten-der-welt/id2020-ktdi-apple-google/)
to expand monitoring and control of an increasingly uneasy society. The
most important instruments currently under discussion by several
governments include:

1.  The introduction of applications for “tracing” contacts across
    society
2.  The establishment of units to enforce the tracing and isolation of
    citizens
3.  The introduction of digital biometric ID cards to control and
    regulate participation in social and professional activities.
4.  The extended control of travel and payment transactions (including
    the abolition of cash).
5.  The creation of a legal basis for access to and intervention in
    citizens’ biological systems by governments or corporations (based
    on so-called “compulsory vaccinations”).

In the US, former President Bill Clinton discussed the introduction of a
national network of “contact tracers” [with governors of various
states](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-Ug9XHT9JQQ) in April. The
governor of New York, Andrew Cuomo, then announced that together with
billionaire and former New York City mayor Michael Bloomberg, he would
[create a “contact tracing
army”](https://www.cbsnews.com/news/contact-tracing-new-york-cuomo-plan/)
with up to 17,000 contact tracers for New York.

Meanwhile, in the UK and many other countries, governments are calling
for the introduction of [biometric “immunity
passports”](https://www.msn.com/en-us/money/news/the-uk-just-published-blueprints-for-covid-19-immunity-passports-a-controversial-potential-route-out-of-lockdown/ar-BB13qr8L)
and presenting them as the allegedly “only way out” of the primarily
politically motivated lockdown. The British Tony Blair Institute called
for the [“expansion of technological
surveillance”](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/apr/24/surveillance-a-price-worth-paying-to-beat-coronavirus-says-blair-thinktank)
to “combat the corona virus”.

In the US, the Silicon Valley data analysis company Palantir is to play
a key role in [setting up the data
platform](https://www.msn.com/en-us/news/us/team-trump-turns-to-peter-thiel-s-palantir-to-track-virus/ar-BB130qfE)
for monitoring the (already declining) spread of the corona virus.
Palantir is known for its IT projects with intelligence agencies and the
military and was founded by US billionaire and Trump supporter Peter
Thiel.

In Israel, contact monitoring of the civilian population is [carried out
by](https://www.techdirt.com/articles/20200402/14261944226/controversial-spyware-vendor-nso-group-is-helping-israeli-government-spy-own-citizens.shtml)
the domestic intelligence service Shin Bet, using programs from the
notorious NSO Group, known for its spy software used to monitor civil
and human rights activists around the world.

Countries like Russia and China also want to [massively
expand](https://www.npr.org/sections/coronavirus-live-updates/2020/04/01/825329399/moscow-launches-new-surveillance-app-to-track-residents-in-coronavirus-lockdown)
the surveillance of the population in the wake of the alleged “corona
crisis”, but will most likely do so independently of the US.

The idea that a pandemic can be used to expand control of the population
is not new: as early as 2010, the American Rockefeller Foundation
described a „lock step scenario“ in a [report on future technological
and social
developments](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/rockefeller-foundation-scenarios-2010.pdf),
in which current events were anticipated with impressive accuracy (pages
18ff). At the time, the scenario was conceived as a kind of
authoritarian “worst case”.

Meanwhile, more than 500 scientists have warned in an open letter
against [“unprecedented surveillance of
society”](https://www.esat.kuleuven.be/cosic/sites/contact-tracing-joint-statement/)
through contact tracking apps.

The so-called Center for Health Security at Johns Hopkins University,
which is at the heart of the Covid19 pandemic management and which has
contributed greatly to the global escalation through its misleading
charts, is also [very closely linked to the US security
apparatus](http://unlimitedhangout.com/2020/04/investigative-series/all-roads-lead-to-dark-winter/)
and has been involved in some of its earlier simulations and operations.

In general, cooperation with private actors to achieve geostrategic
goals is not a new or unusual phenomenon in US foreign and security
policy.

For instance, Microsoft founder Bill Gates, the [most important private
sponsor](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wQSYdAX_9JY) of the WHO, the
vaccine industry and biometric ID projects, financed a [Global Health
Program](https://www.cfr.org/news-releases/council-establishes-senior-fellowship-global-health-and-foreign-policy-grant-bill)
of the US Council on Foreign Relations as early as 2003, which is
concerned with the question of how health policy influences geopolitics
and, conversely, how health policy can be used to achieve geostrategic
goals.

#### April 25, 2020

##### **Medical updates**

  - Professor Detlef Krüger, the direct predecessor of the well-known
    German virologist Christian Drosten at the Charité Clinic in Berlin,
    [explains in a recent
    interview](https://de.sputniknews.com/interviews/20200425326953541-corona-gefahr-virologe/)
    that Covid19 is “in many respects comparable to the flu” and “no
    more dangerous than certain variants of the flu virus”. Professor
    Krüger considers the “mouth and nose protection discovered by
    politicians” to be “actionism” and a potential “germ-slinger”. At
    the same time he warns of “massive collateral damage” caused by the
    measures taken.
  - The former Swedish and European chief epidemiologist Professor Johan
    Giesecke gave the Austrian magazine Addendum [a candid
    interview](https://www.addendum.org/coronavirus/interview-johan-giesecke/).
    Professor Giesecke says that 75 to 90% of the epidemic is
    “invisible” because that many people develop no or hardly any
    symptoms. A lockdown would therefore be “pointless” and harm
    society. The basis of the Swedish strategy was that “people are not
    stupid”. Giesecke expects a death rate between 0.1 and 0.2%, similar
    to that of influenza. Italy and New York had been very poorly
    prepared for the virus and had not protected their risk groups,
    Professor Giesecke argues.
  - The [latest figures from
    Italy](https://www.epicentro.iss.it/coronavirus/bollettino/Bollettino-sorveglianza-integrata-COVID-19_16-aprile-2020.pdf#page=13)
    show (pp. 12/13) that 60 of almost 17,000 doctors and nurses who
    tested positive died. This results in a Covid19 lethality rate of
    less than 0.1% for those under 50, 0.27% for those aged 50 to 60,
    1.4% for those aged 60 to 70, and 12.6% for those aged 70 to 80.
    Even these figures are likely too high, as these are deaths *with*
    and not necessarily *from* corona viruses, and as up to 80% of
    people remain asymptomatic and some may not have been tested.
    Overall, however, the values are in line with those from e.g. South
    Korea and give a lethality rate for the general population in the
    range of influenza.
  - The head of the Italian Civil Defence [declared in
    mid-April](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/apr/16/italian-police-broaden-care-home-coronavirus-milan)
    that more than 1800 people died in nursing homes in Lombardy, and
    that in many cases the cause of death was not yet clear. It was
    already known beforehand that the care of the elderly and nursing
    homes and, as a result, the entire health care system in parts of
    Lombardy had collapsed, in part due to [fear of the virus and the
    lockdown](https://swprs.org/covid-19-a-report-from-italy/).
  - The [latest figures from
    Belgium](https://covid-19.sciensano.be/sites/default/files/Covid19/Meest%20recente%20update.pdf)
    show that there too, just over 50% of all additional deaths occur in
    nursing homes, which do not benefit from a general lockdown. In 6%
    of these deaths Covid19 was “confirmed”, in 94% of the deaths it was
    “suspected”. About 70% of the test-positive persons (employees and
    residents) showed no symptoms.
  - The British Guardian [cites new
    studies](https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2020/apr/20/air-pollution-may-be-key-contributor-to-covid-19-deaths-study?utm_medium)
    according to which air pollution could be a “key factor” in Covid19
    deaths. For example, 80% of deaths in four countries were in the
    most polluted regions (including Lombardy and Madrid).
  - The Californian physician Dr. Dan Erickson described his
    observations regarding Covid19 in a [much-noticed press
    briefing](https://www.turnto23.com/news/coronavirus/video-interview-with-dr-dan-erickson-and-dr-artin-massihi-taken-down-from-youtube).
    Hospitals and intensive care units in California and other states
    have remained largely empty so far. Dr. Erickson reports that
    doctors from several US states have been “pressured” to issue death
    certificates mentioning Covid19, even though they themselves did not
    agree. Dr. Erickson recommends quarantining only the sick and not
    the healthy or the whole society, as this could have negative
    effects on health and psyche. A significant increase in “secondary
    effects” such as alcoholism, depression, suicide and abuse of
    children and spouses has already been observed. Based on figures
    from various countries, Dr. Erickson estimates the lethality of
    Covid-19 to be about 0.1% or similar to influenza. According to Dr
    Erickson, a face mask only makes sense in acute situations such as
    in hospital, but not in everyday life. (**Note**: Youtube deleted
    the press briefing after it had 5 million views.)
  - The German newspaper DIE ZEIT focuses on the [high vacancy rates in
    German
    hospitals](https://www.zeit.de/2020/18/kliniken-coronavirus-intensivbetten-patienten-behandlung-notaufnahme),
    which in some departments are as high as 70%. Even cancer
    examinations and organ transplants that were not acutely necessary
    for survival had been cancelled to make room for Covid19 patients,
    but these have so far been largely absent.
  - A new analysis from the UK concludes that there are currently about
    [2000 people per
    week](https://www.telegraph.co.uk/global-health/science-and-disease/two-new-waves-deaths-break-nhs-new-analysis-warns/)
    dying at home *without Covid19* because they cannot or do not want
    to use the health care system. These are mainly emergency patients
    with heart attacks and strokes as well as chronically ill people.
  - Researchers in Austria [concluded
    that](https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/advance-article/doi/10.1093/eurheartj/ehaa314/5820829)
    more people died there in March from untreated heart attacks than
    from Covid19.
  - In Germany, a mask requirement was introduced in public transport
    and in retail outlets. The president of the World Medical
    Association, Frank Montgomery, [has criticized
    this](https://www.aerztezeitung.de/Politik/Montgomery-haelt-Maskenpflicht-fuer-falsch-408844.html)
    as “wrong” and the intended use of scarves and drapes as
    “ridiculous”. In fact, studies show that the use of masks in
    everyday life does not bring measurable benefits to healthy and
    asymptomatic people, which is why the Swiss infectiologist Dr.
    Vernazza spoke of a [“media
    hype”](https://infekt.ch/2020/04/atemschutzmasken-fuer-alle-medienhype-oder-unverzichtbar/).
    Other critics speak of a symbol of “[forced, publicly visible
    obedience”](https://multipolar-magazin.de/artikel/maskenpflicht-gesellschaftliches-klima).
  - In 2019, a WHO study found [“little to no scientific
    evidence”](https://www.heise.de/tp/features/COVID-19-WHO-Studie-findet-kaum-Belege-fuer-die-Wirksamkeit-von-Eindaemmungsmassnahmen-4706446.html)
    for the effectiveness of measures such as “social distancing”,
    travel restrictions and lockdowns. ([Original
    study](https://www.who.int/influenza/publications/public_health_measures/publication/en/))
  - A German laboratory [stated in early
    April](http://www.labor-augsburg-mvz.de/de/aktuelles/coronavirus)
    that according to WHO recommendations, Covid19 virus tests are now
    considered positive even if the specific target sequence of the
    Covid19 virus is *negative* and only the more general corona virus
    target sequence is positive. However, this can lead to other corona
    viruses (cold viruses) also trigger a false positive test result.
    The laboratory also explained that Covid19 antibodies are often only
    detectable two to three weeks after the onset of symptoms. This must
    be taken into account so that the actual number of people already
    immune to Covid19 is not underestimated.
  - In both
    [Switzerland](https://www.20min.ch/schweiz/news/story/-rzte-und-Politiker-fordern-Corona-Impfzwang-20853917)
    and
    [Germany](https://www.t-online.de/nachrichten/deutschland/id_87757340/corona-krise-markus-soeder-spricht-sich-fuer-deutschlandweite-impfpflicht-aus.html),
    some politicians have called for “compulsory vaccination against
    corona”. However, the vaccination against the so-called “swine flu”
    of 2009/2010, for example, led to sometimes [severe neurological
    damage](https://www.ibtimes.co.uk/brain-damaged-uk-victims-swine-flu-vaccine-get-60-million-compensation-1438572),
    especially in children, and to claims for damages in the millions.
  - Professor Christopher Kuhbandner:[About the lack of scientific
    justification for the corona
    measures](https://www.heise.de/tp/features/Von-der-fehlenden-wissenschaftlichen-Begruendung-der-Corona-Massnahmen-4709563.html?seite=all):
    “The reported figures on new infections very dramatically
    overestimate the true spread of the corona virus. The observed rapid
    increase in new infections is almost exclusively due to the fact
    that the number of tests has increased rapidly over time (see figure
    below). So, at least according to the reported figures, there was in
    reality never an exponential spread of the coronavirus. The reported
    figures on new infections hide the fact that the number of new
    infections has been decreasing since about early or mid-March.”

![Green: Real increase of infected people; red: increase due to more
tests.](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/zunahme-infektionen-tests-tag.png?w=550&h=404)

##### **Sweden: The media versus reality**

Some readers were surprised by the decrease in deaths in Sweden, as most
media show a steeply *rising* curve. What is the reason for this? Most
media show *cumulative* figures by date of *reporting*, while the
Swedish authorities publish the much more meaningful *daily* figures by
date of *death*.

The Swedish authorities always stress that not all newly reported cases
have died within the last 24 hours, but many media ignore this (see
graph below). Although the latest Swedish figures may still increase
somewhat, as in all countries, this does not change the generally
declining trend.

In addition, these figures represent deaths *with* and not necessarily
*from* coronavirus. The average age of death in Sweden is also over 80
years, about 50% of deaths occurred in vulnerable nursing homes, while
the effect on the general population has remained minimal, even though
Sweden has one of the [lowest intensive care
capacities](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00134-012-2627-8)
in Europe.

However, the Swedish government has also been given [new emergency
powers](https://www.tagesschau.de/faktenfinder/ausland/corona-kursaenderung-schweden-103.html)
due to “corona” and could still participate in later contact tracing
programmes.

![Cumulative deaths by date of reporting vs. daily deaths by date of
death. (OWD /
FOHM)](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/sweden-corona-media-vs-reality.png?w=736&h=338)

##### **The situation in Great Britain**

Deaths in the UK have risen sharply in recent weeks, but are still in
the range of the [strongest flu
seasons](http://inproportion2.talkigy.com/) of the last fifty years (see
chart below). In the UK, too, [up
to 50%](https://ltccovid.org/2020/04/12/mortality-associated-with-covid-19-outbreaks-in-care-homes-early-international-evidence/)
of additional deaths occur in nursing homes, which do not benefit from a
general lockdown.

Moreover, [up
to 50%](https://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/news/coronavirus-record-weekly-death-toll-as-fearful-patients-avoid-hospitals-bm73s2tw3)
of the additional deaths are said to be non-Covid19 deaths and [up
to 25%](https://www.ft.com/content/67e6a4ee-3d05-43bc-ba03-e239799fa6ab)
of the additional deaths occur at home. It is therefore not at all clear
whether the general lockdown is beneficial or in fact detrimental to
society at large.

The editor of the British *Spectator* [has claimed
that](https://www.telegraph.co.uk/politics/2020/04/09/boris-worried-lockdown-has-gone-far-can-end/)
government agencies expect the lockdown to result in up to 150,000
additional deaths in the longer term, significantly more than what
Covid19 is expected to cause. Most recently, the case of a 17-year-old
student and singer who took her own life because of the lockdown [became
known](https://sports.yahoo.com/coronavirus-bethany-palmer-teenager-death-suicide-152707750.html).

It is striking that England, in contrast to most other countries
(including Sweden), has a significantly elevated mortality rate even
[among 15 to 64-year-olds](https://www.euromomo.eu/). This could be due
to the frequent cardiovascular preconditions, or it might be caused by
the [effects of the
lockdown](https://www.telegraph.co.uk/global-health/science-and-disease/two-new-waves-deaths-break-nhs-new-analysis-warns/).

The [InProportion project](http://inproportion2.talkigy.com/) has
published numerous new graphs that put current UK mortality in relation
to previous flu outbreaks and other causes of death. Other websites that
critically review the British situation and measures are [Lockdown
Skeptics](https://lockdownsceptics.org/) and [UK
Column](https://www.ukcolumn.org/).

![UK: Weekly all-cause mortality
(InProportion)](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/inproportion2_chart5.png?w=736&h=363)

##### **Switzerland: Excess mortality well below strong flu waves**

  - A first serological study by the University of Geneva [concluded
    that](https://www.hug-ge.ch/medias/communique-presse/seroprevalence-covid-19-premiere-estimation)
    at least six times more people in the canton of Geneva had contact
    with Covid19 than previously thought. This means that the lethality
    of Covid19 in Switzerland also falls well below one percent, while
    official sources still speak of up to 5%.
  - Even in the most severely affected canton of Ticino, [almost
    half](https://www.bluewin.ch/de/news/schweiz/sp-chef-levrat-will-die-reichen-schropfen-383977.html)
    of the additional deaths occurred in nursing homes that do not
    benefit from the general lockdown.
  - In Switzerland, 1.85 million people or over a third of all employees
    have already been [registered for short-time
    work](https://www.bluewin.ch/de/news/schweiz/sp-chef-levrat-will-die-reichen-schropfen-383977.html).
    The economic costs are estimated at 32 billion for the period from
    March to June.
  - **Infosperber**: [Corona: The parroting of the
    media](https://www.infosperber.ch/Artikel/Medien/Corona-NZZ-deckt-das-Nachplappern-anderer-Medien-auf).
    “Major media outlets are hiding the fact that they rely on opaque
    data for Covid-19 numbers.”
  - **Ktipp**: [Swiss authorities: Almost all numbers ‘without
    guarantee’.](https://www.ktipp.ch/artikel/artikeldetail/bund-fast-alle-zahlen-ohne-gewaehr/)
    “This year fewer under-65s died in the first 14 weeks than in the
    last five years. Among the over-65s, the number was also relatively
    low.”

The following graph shows that overall mortality in Switzerland in the
first quarter of 2020 was in the normal range and that by mid-April it
was still around 2000 people below the flu wave of 2015. 50% of deaths
occurred in [nursing
homes](https://www.nzz.ch/zuerich/coronavirus-zuerich-aendert-nun-das-testregime-in-heimenauch-viele-aeltere-covid-19-infizierte-entwickeln-keine-symptome-zuerich-aendert-nun-das-testregime-in-heimen-ld.1552089)
that do not benefit from a lockdown.

Overall, around 75% of the additional deaths occurred [at
home](https://www.tagesspiegel.de/wissen/woran-sterben-corona-patienten-wirklich-ein-schweizer-forscher-macht-hoffnung-im-kampf-gegen-covid-19/25750666.html),
while hospitals and intensive care units remain [heavily
underutilized](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/intensivbettenbelegung-schweiz-2020-04-14.png)
and numerous operations have been cancelled. In Switzerland, too, the
very serious question thus arises as to whether the “lockdown” may have
cost more lives than it saved.

![Cumulated deaths compared to expected value, 2010 to 2020
(BFS)](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/schweiz-todesfaelle-2010-2020.png?w=736&h=357)

##### **Political updates**

  - **Video**: In the Australian state of Queensland, a police
    helicopter with night-vision equipment [tracked down three young
    men](https://twitter.com/Independent/status/1252911273597120513) who
    were drinking a beer on the roof of a house at night, thus violating
    “Corona regulations”. The men were informed via a megaphone that the
    building is “surrounded by police” and that they must proceed to the
    exit. The men [were
    fined](https://www.dailystar.co.uk/news/world-news/police-helicopter-uses-night-vision-21899640)
    about $1000 each.
  - In **Israel**, the domestic and anti-terrorism intelligence agency
    Shin Bet, in cooperation with the police, [has been
    tasked](https://www.jewishpress.com/news/the-courts/state-to-high-court-even-more-shin-bet-involvement-in-fighting-the-coronavirus/2020/04/14/)
    to monitor the population’s mobile phones since mid-March in order
    to track contacts and order house arrest in the context of Covid19.
    These measures were initially ordered without the consent of
    Parliament and are due to remain in place until at least the end of
    April.
  - **OffGuardian**: [The Seven Step Path from Pandemic to
    Totalitarianism](https://off-guardian.org/2020/04/23/the-seven-step-path-from-pandemic-to-totalitarianism/)
  - **UK Column**: [Who controls the British Government response to
    Covid-19?](https://www.ukcolumn.org/article/who-controls-british-government-response-covid19-part-one)
  - The **corona-critical Swiss doctor**, who was arrested by a special
    unit of the Swiss police and sent to a psychiatric clinic (see
    update of April 15), has meanwhile been released. A report by the
    magazine Weltwoche [revealed
    that](https://uncut-news.ch/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/Wer-l%C3%B6ste-den-Fehlalarm-aus.pdf)
    the doctor was arrested on false grounds: there had been no threat
    to relatives or authorities and there had been no possession of a
    loaded weapon. Thus, a politically motivated operation seems likely.
  - A Munich local radio station, which interviewed doctors critical of
    corona in March, [was
    informed](https://norberthaering.de/medienversagen/radiomuenchen-blm-meinungsvielfalt/)
    by the responsible media supervisory authority after complaints that
    “such problematic broadcasts must be stopped in the future”.
  - The website [kollateral.news](https://kollateral.news/) of a German
    specialist lawyer is collecting reports on “suffering due to the
    lockdown” and on the actual situation in German hospitals.
  - German general practitioners have published an [appeal to politics
    and science](https://aerzteinnenvorort.de/der-appell) in which they
    call for “a more responsible handling of the corona crisis”.
  - Both in
    [Austria](https://www.sn.at/panorama/oesterreich/arzt-droht-berufsverbot-wegen-kritik-an-corona-massnahmen-86594140)
    and in
    [Hungary](https://magyarhang.org/belfold/2020/04/16/etikai-vizsgalat-indul-az-orvos-ellen-aki-szerint-nincs-jarvany-es-az-idosek-csak-a-felelemtol-halnak-meg/),
    doctors who have criticised the corona measures are threatened with
    a ban from their profession.
  - In Nigeria, according to official figures, more people have so far
    been killed [by the police enforcing corona
    curfews](https://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-52317196) than by the
    corona virus itself.

#### April 21, 2020

##### **Medical updates**

  - Stanford professor of medicine John Ioannidis explains in a [new
    one-hour interview](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cwPqmLoZA4s) the
    results of several new studies on Covid19. According to Professor
    Ioannidis, the lethality of Covid19 is “in the range of seasonal
    flu”. For people under 65 years of age, the mortality risk even in
    the global “hotspots” is comparable to the daily car ride to work,
    while for *healthy* people under 65 years of age, the mortality risk
    is “completely negligible”. Only in New York City was the mortality
    risk for persons under 65 years of age comparable to a long-distance
    truck driver.
  - Professor Carl Heneghan, Director of the Centre for Evidence-Based
    Medicine at Oxford University, warns[in a new
    article](https://news.yahoo.com/lockdown-damage-outweighs-coronavirus-warning-121940675.html)
    that the damage caused by the lockdown could be greater than that
    caused by the virus. The peak of the epidemic had already been
    reached in most countries before the lockdown, Professor Heneghan
    argues.
  - A [new serological
    study](http://publichealth.lacounty.gov/phcommon/public/media/mediapubhpdetail.cfm?prid=2328)
    in Los Angeles County found that 28 to 55 times more people had
    Covid19 than previously assumed (without showing significant
    symptoms), which reduces the danger of the disease accordingly.
  - In the city of Chelsea near Boston, about [one third of 200 blood
    donors](https://archive.is/20200418222442/https://www.bostonglobe.com/2020/04/17/business/nearly-third-200-blood-samples-taken-chelsea-show-exposure-coronavirus/)
    had antibodies against the Covid19 pathogen. Half of them reported
    having experienced a cold symptom in the last month. In a homeless
    shelter near Boston, just over a third of the people tested
    positive, but [nobody showed any
    symptoms](https://www.wsbtv.com/news/trending/coronavirus-cdc-reviewing-stunning-universal-testing-results-boston-homeless-shelter/ZADQ45HCAZEVJAZA3OTCUR7M6M/).
  - Scotland reports that half of the (stocked up) intensive care beds
    [have remained
    empty](https://www.heraldscotland.com/news/18377095.coronavirus-scotland-half-icu-beds-empty/).
    According to officials, the admission of new patients is “levelling
    off”.
  - The emergency room in Bergamo’s municipal hospital was [completely
    empty](https://orf.at/stories/3162642/) at the beginning of this
    week for the first time in 45 days. In the meantime, more people
    with other diseases than “Covid19 patients” are being treated again.
  - A report in the medical magazine Lancet comes to the conclusion that
    school closures to contain corona viruses have [no or only a minimal
    effect](https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanchi/article/PIIS2352-4642\(20\)30095-X/fulltext).
  - A nine-year-old French child with corona infection had contact with
    172 people, but [none of them were
    infected](https://www.n-tv.de/panorama/172-Kontaktpersonen-von-Corona-verschont-article21727469.html).
    This confirms earlier results that corona infection (unlike
    influenza) is not or hardly ever transmitted by children.
  - The German emeritus microbiology professor Sucharit Bhakdi gave [a
    new one-hour
    interview](https://kenfm.de/kenfm-am-set-gespraech-mit-prof-dr-sucharit-bhakdi-zu-covid-19/)
    on Covid-19. Professor Bhakdi argues that most media have acted
    “completely irresponsibly” during the Covid-19 epidemic.
  - The German Initiative for Care Ethics
    [criticises](http://pflegeethik-initiative.de/2020/04/15/corona-krise-falsche-prioritaeten-gesetzt-und-ethische-prinzipien-verletzt/)
    blanket bans on visits and painful intensive care treatment of
    nursing patients: “Even before Corona, around 900 old people in need
    of care died every day in German homes without being taken to
    hospital. In fact, palliative treatment, if at all, would be more
    appropriate for these patients. () According to all we know about
    Corona so far, there is not a single plausible reason to continue to
    value infection protection higher than the basic rights of citizens.
    Lift the inhuman visiting bans\!”
  - The oldest woman in the Swiss canton of St. Gallen died last week at
    the age of 109. She survived the “Spanish flu” of 1918, was not
    corona-infected and “for her age she was doing very well”. The
    “corona isolation”, however, had [“very much affected
    her”](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/tagblatt-109.jpg):
    “She faded without the daily visits of her family members.”
  - The Swiss cardiologist Dr. Nils Kucher reports that in Switzerland
    currently about 75% of all additional deaths occur not in hospital
    [but at
    home](https://www.tagesspiegel.de/wissen/woran-sterben-corona-patienten-wirklich-ein-schweizer-forscher-macht-hoffnung-im-kampf-gegen-covid-19/25750666.html).
    This certainly explains the [largely
    empty](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/intensivbettenbelegung-schweiz-2020-04-14.png)
    Swiss hospitals and intensive care units. It is also already known
    that about 50% of all additional deaths occur in [nursing
    homes](https://www.nzz.ch/zuerich/coronavirus-zuerich-aendert-nun-das-testregime-in-heimenauch-viele-aeltere-covid-19-infizierte-entwickeln-keine-symptome-zuerich-aendert-nun-das-testregime-in-heimen-ld.1552089).
    Dr. Kucher suspects that some of these people die of sudden
    pulmonary embolism. This is conceivable. Nevertheless, the question
    arises as to what role the “lockdown” plays in these additional
    deaths.
  - The Italian health authority ISS [warns
    that](https://www.iss.it/en/rapporti-covid-19/-/asset_publisher/btw1J82wtYzH/content/id/5334891)
    Covid19 patients from the Mediterranean region, who often have a
    genetic metabolic peculiarity called favism, should not be treated
    with antimalarial drugs such as chloroquine, as this can lead to
    death. This is a [further
    indication](https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/02/200206110703.htm)
    that the wrong or overly aggressive medication can make the disease
    even worse.
  - Rubicon: [120 expert opinions on
    Corona](https://www.rubikon.news/artikel/120-expertenstimmen-zu-corona).
    Worldwide, high-ranking scientists, doctors, lawyers and other
    experts criticize the handling of the corona virus. (German)

##### **Classification of the pandemic**

In 2007, the US health authorities defined a [five-tier
classification](https://www.cidrap.umn.edu/news-perspective/2007/02/hhs-ties-pandemic-mitigation-advice-severity)
for pandemic influenza and counter-measures. The five categories are
based on the observed lethality (CFR) of the pandemic, from category 1
(\<0.1%) to category 5 (\>2%). According to this key, the current corona
pandemic would probably be classified in category 2 (0.1% to 0.5%). For
this category, only the “voluntary isolation of sick persons” was
envisaged as the main measure at the time.

In 2009, however, the WHO [deleted severity from its pandemic
definition](https://www.forbes.com/2010/02/05/world-health-organization-swine-flu-pandemic-opinions-contributors-michael-fumento.html#5ae32fb848e8).
Since then, in principle, every global wave of influenza can be declared
a pandemic, as happened with the very mild “swine flu” of 2009/2010, for
which vaccines worth around 18 billion dollars were sold.

The documentary TrustWHO (“Trust who?”), which deals with the dubious
role of the WHO in the context of “swine flu”, [was recently deleted by
VIMEO](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VjQGyqVN5RM).

##### **Swiss chief physician Pietro Vernazza: Simple measures are sufficient**

In his [latest
contribution](https://infekt.ch/2020/04/sind-wir-tatsaechlich-im-blindflug/),
the Swiss chief physician of infectiology, Pietro Vernazza, uses the
results of the German Robert Koch Institute and ETH Zurich to show that
the Covid19 epidemic was already under control before the “lockdown” was
even introduced:

“These results are explosive: Both studies show that simple measures
such as the renunciation of major events and the introduction of hygiene
measures are highly effective. The population is able to implement these
recommendations well and the measures can almost bring the epidemic to a
halt. In any case, the measures are sufficient to protect our health
system in such a way that the hospitals are not overburdened”.

![Reproduction rate in Switzerland
(ETH/Vernazza)](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/ch-reproduktionszahl-eth-infekt.png?w=650&h=379)

##### **Switzerland: Cumulative total mortality in the normal range**

In Switzerland, *cumulative* total mortality in the first quarter (until
April 5) was [at the mean expected
value](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/ch-sterblichkeit-kumuliert-q1-2020.pdf)
and more than 1500 deaths *below* the upper expected value. Moreover, by
the middle of April the total mortality rate was still more than 2000
deaths *below* the comparative value from the severe flu season of 2015
(see figure below).

![Cumulative mortality compared to medium expected value 2010 to 2020
(BFS)](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/schweiz-todesfaelle-2010-2020.png?w=700&h=339)

##### **Sweden: Epidemic ending even without lockdown**

The latest figures on patients and deaths show that the epidemic is
coming to an end in Sweden. In Sweden, as in most other countries,
excess mortality occurred mainly in nursing homes that were not
protected well enough, the chief epidemiologist
[explained](https://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2020/apr/15/sweden-coronavirus-rates-easing-despite-loose-rule/).

Compared to other countries, the Swedish population may now benefit from
higher immunity to the Covid19 virus, which could better protect them
from a possible “second wave” next winter.

It can be assumed that by the end of 2020, Covid19 will not be visible
in the Swedish overall mortality. The Swedish example shows that
“lockdowns” were medically unnecessary or even counterproductive as
well as socially and economically devastating.

**Video**: [Why lockdowns are the wrong policy – Swedish expert
Professor Johan Giesecke](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bfN2JWifLCY)

![Test-positive deaths in Sweden
([FOHM/Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2020_coronavirus_pandemic_in_Sweden#Charts7be6f9f87457ed9aa);
values may still change
somewhat)](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/sweden-deaths-day-2.png?w=736&h=293)

##### **Anecdotes vs. evidence**

In the face of a lack of scientific evidence, some media increasingly
rely on gruesome anecdotes in order to maintain fear in the population.
A typical example are “healthy children” who allegedly died of Covid19,
but who later often turn out [not to have
died](https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-8193487/Coroner-refuses-rule-COVID-19-cause-death-six-week-old-Connecticut-baby.html)
of Covid19, or who were[seriously
ill](https://sports.yahoo.com/spanish-football-coach-francisco-garcia-163153573.html).

Austrian media recently reported about [some
divers](https://www.rainews.it/tgr/tagesschau/articoli/2020/04/tag-Coronavirus-Lungeschaden-Forschung-Uniklinik-Innsbruck-6708e11e-28dc-4843-a760-e7f926ace61c.html)
who, six weeks after a Covid19 disease with lung involvement, still
showed reduced performance and conspicuous imaging. One section speaks
of “irreversible damage”, the next explains that this is “unclear and
speculative”. It is not mentioned that divers should generally take a [6
to 12 month
break](https://www.deeperblue.com/pulmonary-considerations-in-diving/)
after serious pneumonia.

Neurological effects such as the temporary loss of the sense of smell or
taste are also often mentioned. Here too, it is usually not explained
that this is a [well-known
effect](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25294743) of cold and flu
viruses, and Covid19 is [rather mild in this
respect](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23948436).

In other reports, possible effects on various organs such as kidneys,
liver or brain are highlighted, without mentioning that many of the
patients affected were already very old and had severe [chronic
pre-existing
conditions](https://www.epicentro.iss.it/coronavirus/sars-cov-2-decessi-italia).

##### **Political updates**

  - WOZ: [When fear
    rules](https://www.woz.ch/2016/grundrechte/wenn-die-angst-regiert).
    “With drones, apps and demo bans: In the wake of the Corona
    crisis, fundamental freedoms are being eroded. If we don’t watch
    out, they will remain so even after the lockdown – but the extreme
    situation also offers reason for hope.” (German)
  - Multipolar: [What is the
    agenda?](https://multipolar-magazin.de/artikel/die-massnahmen-wirken)
    “The government praises itself, spreads slogans of perseverance and
    at the same time slows down the collection of basic data that would
    allow the reliable measurement of the spread and danger of the
    virus. In contrast, the authorities are acting quickly and
    decisively in expanding questionable instruments, such as new
    “corona apps” for collective pulse measurement and contact
    tracing”. (German)
  - Professor Christian Piska, expert for public law and legal tech in
    Vienna: “Austria has changed. Very much so, even if most people seem
    to just accept it. Step by step, whether the economy is booming or
    not, we are suddenly living with police-state conditions and severe
    restrictions on our basic and human rights, which would be a perfect
    match for dictatorial regimes. () This is Pandora’s box, which once
    opened, [may never be closed
    again](https://kurier.at/meinung/das-juristische-totschlagargument-vom-menschenleben/400814570).”
    (German)
  - More than 300 scientists from 26 countries warn of [“unprecedented
    surveillance of
    society”](https://www.golem.de/news/corona-app-300-wissenschaftler-warnen-vor-zentraler-datenspeicherung-2004-147973.html)
    by corona apps violating data protection. Several scientists and
    universities have already withdrawn from the European contact
    tracing project PEPP-PT due to a lack of transparency. Recently it
    became known that the Swiss company AGT is involved in the project,
    which had previously set up mass surveillance systems for Arab
    states.
  - In Israel, about 5000 people (with a distance of 2m each)
    [demonstrated against the
    measures](https://edition.cnn.com/2020/04/20/middleeast/israel-protest-social-distancing-intl/index.html)
    of the Netanyahu government: “They talk about an exponential
    increase of  corona cases, but the only thing that increases
    exponentially are the people who stand up to protect our country and
    our democracy”.
  - Madrid-based Irish journalist Jason O’Toole [describes the situation
    in
    Spain](https://www.rt.com/op-ed/486350-spain-tough-rules-covid-19-lockdown/):
    “With the military visible on the streets of Spain it’s hard not to
    describe the situation as martial law in all but name. George
    Orwell’s Big Brother is alive and well here, with the Spanish
    police monitoring everybody using CCTV or by flying drones overhead.
    A staggering 650,000 people were fined and 5,568 arrested during the
    first four weeks alone. () I was shocked when I watched one video
    clip of a cop using heavy force to arrest a mentally ill young man
    who was apparently just walking home with bread.”
  - OffGuardian: [The disturbing developments in UK
    policing](https://off-guardian.org/2020/04/18/the-disturbing-developments-in-uk-policing/).
  - In a new article, US investigative journalist Whitney Webb writes on
    [“How The US National Security State Is Using Coronavirus To Fulfill
    An Orwellian
    Vision”](https://www.thelastamericanvagabond.com/top-news/techno-tyranny-how-us-national-security-state-using-coronavirus-fulfill-orwellian-vision/):
    “<span class="s1">Last year, a government commission called for the
    US to adopt an AI-driven mass surveillance system far beyond that
    used in any other country in order to ensure American hegemony in
    artificial intelligence. Now, many of the “obstacles” they had cited
    as preventing its implementation are rapidly being removed under the
    guise of combating the coronavirus crisis.”</span>
  - In a [previous
    article](https://www.thelastamericanvagabond.com/top-news/all-roads-lead-dark-winter/),
    Whitney Webb already dealt with the central role of the “Center for
    Health Security” at Johns Hopkins University in the current pandemic
    management as well as its role in previous pandemic and bioweapons
    simulations and its close links to the US security apparatus.
  - The idea of using a pandemic to expand global surveillance and
    control instruments is not new. As early as 2010, the American
    Rockefeller Foundation described a “lock step scenario” in a
    [working paper on future technological and social
    developments](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/rockefeller-foundation-scenarios-2010.pdf),
    in which current developments are anticipated with impressive
    accuracy (pages 18ff).
  - [“The truth about
    Fauci”](https://childrenshealthdefense.org/news/the-truth-about-fauci-featuring-dr-judy-mikovits/):
    In a new interview, US virologist Dr. Judy Mikovits talks about her
    experiences with Dr. Anthony Fauci, who is currently playing a major
    role in shaping the US government’s Covid19 measures.
  - Aid organisations warn that “far more people” will [die from the
    economic consequences of the
    measures](https://www.welt.de/wirtschaft/article207092745/Corona-Pandemie-Rezession-beschert-der-Welt-die-noch-groessere-Katastrophe.html)
    than from Covid-19 itself. Forecasts now predict that 35 to 65
    million people will fall into absolute poverty, and many of them are
    threatened with starvation.
  - In Germany, 2.35 million people are predicted to be [on short-time
    working](https://www.boeckler.de/pdf/p_wsi_pb_38_2020.pdf) in 2020,
    more than twice as many as after the financial crisis of 2008/2009.

![People on short-time working in Germany
(BfA)](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/kurzarbeit-de-corona.png?w=650&h=461)

<div lang="en-us;">

#### April 18, 2020

##### **Medical updates**

  - A [new serological study by Stanford
    University](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.04.14.20062463v1)
    found antibodies in 50 to 85 times more people than previously
    thought in Santa Clara County, California, resulting in a Covid-19
    lethality of 0.12% to 0.2% or even lower (i.e. in the range of
    severe influenza). Professor John Ioannidis explains the study [in a
    new video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jGUgrEfSgaU).
  - In a new analysis, the Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine (CEBM) at
    the University of Oxford [argues
    that](https://www.cebm.net/covid-19/global-covid-19-case-fatality-rates/)
    the lethality of covid19 (IFR) is between 0.1% and 0.36% (i.e. in
    the range of a severe influenza). In people over 70 years of age
    *with no serious preconditions*, the mortality rate is expected to
    be less than 1%. For people over 80 years of age, the mortality rate
    is between 3% and 15%, depending on whether deaths so far were
    mainly *with* or *from* by the disease. In contrast to influenza,
    child mortality is close to zero. With regard to the high mortality
    rate in Northern Italy, the research group points out that Italy has
    the [highest antibiotic
    resistance](https://www.ansa.it/english/news/science_tecnology/2019/11/19/italy-top-in-eu-in-antibiotic-resistance_369e0123-0107-445e-8c17-f11932c9d27c.html)
    in Europe. In fact, data from the Italian authorities show that
    around 80% of the deceased were treated with antibiotics, indicating
    bacterial superinfections.
  - The Finnish epidemiology professor Mikko Paunio from the University
    of Helsinki has evaluated several international studies[in a working
    paper](https://lockdownsceptics.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/How-the-World-got-Fooled-by-COVID-ed-2c.pdf)
    and comes to a Covid19 lethality (IFR) of 0.1% or less (i.e. in the
    area of seasonal influenza). According to Paunio, the impression of
    a higher lethality was created because the virus spread very
    quickly, especially in multi-generation households in Italy and
    Spain, but also in cities like New York. The “lockdown” measures had
    come too late and had not been effective.
  - UK: London’s temporary Nightingale hospital [has remained largely
    empty](https://www.hsj.co.uk/service-design/exclusive-nightingale-largely-empty-as-icus-handle-surge/7027398.article),
    with just 19 patients being treated at the facility over the Easter
    weekend. London’s established hospitals have doubled their ICU
    capacity, and are so far coping with surge.
  - In Canada, 31 people [died in a nursing
    home](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/16/world/canada/montreal-nursing-homes-coronavirus.html)
    after “almost all nursing staff had left the facility in a hurry for
    fear of the corona virus spreading. Health authorities found the
    people in the home in Dorval near Montreal only days later – many of
    the survivors were dehydrated, malnourished and apathetic.” Similar
    tragedies were already [reported from northern
    Italy](https://swprs.org/covid-19-a-report-from-italy/), where
    Eastern European nurses left the country in a hurry when panic broke
    out and lockdown measures were announced.
  - A Scottish doctor who also looks after nursing homes
    [writes](https://drmalcolmkendrick.org/2020/04/17/care-homes-and-covid19/):
    “What was the government strategy for nursing homes? The actions
    taken so far have made the situation much, much worse.”
  - In Switzerland, despite Covid19, total mortality in the first
    quarter of 2020 (until 5th April) was in the [medium normal
    range](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/ch-sterblichkeit-kumuliert-q1-2020.pdf).
    One reason for this could be the mild flu season due to the mild
    winter, which has now been partially “offset” by Covid19.
  - According to a report from April 14, Swiss hospitals and even
    intensive care units continue to be [very
    under-utilized](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/intensivbettenbelegung-schweiz-2020-04-14.png).
    This again raises the question of where and how exactly the
    test-positive deaths (average age 84) in Switzerland actually occur.
  - The President of the German Hospital Association has [sounded the
    alarm](https://www.bz-berlin.de/deutschland/kliniken-verband-schlaegt-alarm-wegen-corona-regeln):
    more than 50 percent of all planned operations throughout Germany
    have been cancelled, and the “operations backlog” is running into
    thousands. In addition, 30 to 40% fewer patients with heart attacks
    and strokes are treated because they no longer dare to go to the
    hospitals for fear of corona. There were 150,000 free hospital beds
    and 10,000 free intensive care beds nationwide. In Berlin, only 68
    intensive care beds are occupied by corona patients, the emergency
    clinic with 1000 beds is currently not in use.
  - New data of German authorities show that in Germany, too, the
    reproduction rate of Covid19 had already fallen below the critical
    value of 1 [before the
    lockdown](https://www.rki.de/DE/Content/Infekt/EpidBull/Archiv/2020/Ausgaben/17_20_SARS-CoV2_vorab.pdf?__blob=publicationFile#page=5).
    General hygiene measures were therefore sufficient to prevent the
    exponential spread. This had already been shown by the ETH Zurich
    for Switzerland as well.
  - On a French aircraft carrier [1081 soldiers tested
    positive](https://www.ouest-france.fr/sante/virus/coronavirus/coronavirus-au-moins-940-marins-positifs-sur-le-charles-de-gaulle-et-son-escorte-6810816).
    So far, almost 50% of them remained symptom-free and about 50%
    showed mild symptoms. 24 soldiers were hospitalized, one of them is
    in intensive care (previous illnesses unknown).
  - Leading German virologist Christian Drosten thinks it is possible
    that some people have already built up an effective so-called
    [background immunity](https://www.watson.de/!324026684) against the
    new corona virus through contact with normal common cold corona
    viruses.
  - Klaus Püschsel, a forensic doctor from Hamburg who has already
    examined numerous test positive deceased, [explains in a new
    article](https://www.abendblatt.de/hamburg/article228908865/hamburg-corona-virus-uke-infektion-covid-19-pueschel-coronavirus-krise-patienten-impfstoff-immunitaet-krankenhaeuser-kontaktverbot-kliniken-infektionsrate-krankheit-pandemie-test-lungenkrankheit-sars-cov-epidemie-sars-cov-2.html):
    “The numbers do not justify the fear of corona”. His findings:
    “Corona is a relatively harmless viral disease. We have to deal
    with the fact that Corona is a normal infection and we have to learn
    to live with it without quarantine”. The fatalities he examined
    would all have had such serious pre-existing conditions that, “even
    if that sounds harsh, they would all have died in the course of this
    year. Püschel adds: “The time of the virologists is over. We should
    now ask others what is the right thing to do in the corona crisis,
    for example the intensive care doctors.”
  - A [review on
    Medscape](https://emedicine.medscape.com/article/227820-overview)
    shows that common cold infections caused by coronaviruses typically
    decline at the end of April – with or without a lockdown.
  - Swiss magazine Infosperber writes: [“Fewer corona cases? Just test
    less\!”](https://www.infosperber.ch/Artikel/Gesundheit/Weniger-Corona-Falle-Einfach-weniger-testen)
    The daily number of “new cases” reported says little about the state
    of the epidemic. It was reckless to trigger fear with the curve of
    cumulative test-positive deaths, they argue.
  - OffGuardian: [Eight more experts questioning the coronavirus
    panic](https://off-guardian.org/2020/04/17/8-more-experts-questioning-the-coronavirus-panic/).
  - **Video**: [Why lockdowns are the wrong policy – Swedish expert
    Prof. Johan Giesecke](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bfN2JWifLCY)
    Swedish epidemiology professor Johan Giesecke speaks of a “tsunami
    of a mild disease” and considers lockdowns to be counterproductive.
    The most important thing, he says, is to provide efficient
    protection for risk groups, especially nursing homes.

![Reproduction number in Germany. Lockdown since March 22. Ban on events
with more than 1000 people since March 9
(RKI).](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/rki-reproduktion-lockdown.png?w=600&h=421)

##### **Ventilation with Covid19**

Other experts in Europe and the USA have expressed their opinion on the
treatment of critical Covid19 patients and strongly advise against
invasive ventilation (intubation). Covid19 patients do not suffer from
acute respiratory failure (ARDS), but from oxygen deficiency, possibly
caused by an oxygen diffusion problem triggered by the virus or the
immune response to it.

  - AP: [Some doctors moving away from ventilators for virus
    patients](https://apnews.com/8ccd325c2be9bf454c2128dcb7bd616d)
  - Video: [Covid-19: Critical Discussion of the Recommendation for
    Early Intubation](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QPlEUAVjxV8)
  - Video: [New York intensive care doctor on Covid19 as a possible
    diffusion hypoxemia](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NmRlvX3VrAQ)
  - Journal: [COVID-19 pneumonia: different respiratory treatments for
    different
    phenotypes?](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00134-020-06033-2)
  - (German) Die WELT: [Sterberate bei Beatmungspatienten gibt Rätsel
    auf](https://www.welt.de/vermischtes/article207221877/Corona-Pandemie-Sterberate-bei-Beatmungspatienten-gibt-Raetsel-auf.html)

</div>

##### **Political updates**

  - **Video**: [Police violence and monitoring during corona lockdowns
    around the
    world](https://archive.org/details/what-in-the-world-is-actually-going-on-document-reveals-plans-step-by-step).
  - In several US states there have been [protests and rallies against
    the lockdown
    measures](https://news.yahoo.com/protests-draw-thousands-over-state-024328374.html).
  - German economist Norbert Haering [explains in several
    articles](https://norberthaering.de/) how the “corona crisis” is
    being used to introduce worldwide monitoring instruments that have
    been planned for some time in the areas of travel, payments, contact
    tracing and biometrics.
  - Giorgio Agamben, Italian philosopher, [on the Corona
    measures](https://www.nzz.ch/feuilleton/coronavirus-giorgio-agamben-zum-zusammenbruch-der-demokratie-ld.1551896):
    “A country, indeed a culture is imploding right now, and nobody
    seems to care. What is going on before our eyes in countries that
    claim to be civilized?”
  - Italian lawyers [lodged a
    complaint](https://www.tvprato.it/2020/04/la-camera-civile-degli-avvocati-pratesi-chiede-lannullamento-del-dpcm-del-10-aprile-e-illegittimo/)
    against corona measures of the government.
  - The German professor of economics Stefan Homburg in DIE WELT: [“Why
    Germany’s lockdown is wrong – and Sweden is doing much
    better”](https://www.msn.com/de-de/nachrichten/coronavirus/warum-deutschlands-lockdown-falsch-ist-%E2%80%93-und-schweden-vieles-besser-macht/ar-BB12E6km):
    “In summary, countries like Sweden, South Korea or Taiwan have acted
    wisely by not using lockdowns. The virologists there guided the
    population and politicians through the crisis with a steady hand,
    instead of unsettling them by constantly changing course. The
    coronavirus was successfully contained without harming fundamental
    rights and jobs. Germany should take this policy as a model for
    itself.”
  - A Swiss citizen [has sent an urgent
    application](https://faktenb-covid-19-massnahmen.jimdofree.com/) to
    the Federal Administrative Court and the Federal Council to have the
    lockdown lifted immediately.
  - **Video**: [“Swiss doctors were muzzled, the Federal Council is
    divided.”](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eU6IdglI-wc) An interview
    with Dr. med. Stephan Rietiker, the founder of
    [InsideCorona.ch](https://www.insidecorona.ch/)
  - **Video**: [“The Swiss government belongs in prison. A
    polemic.”](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SO2JMkKtq40)

#### April 16, 2020

  - The *London Times* [reports
    that](https://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/news/coronavirus-record-weekly-death-toll-as-fearful-patients-avoid-hospitals-bm73s2tw3)
    up to 50% of current British excess mortality *might not be caused
    by the coronavirus,* but by the effects of the lockdown and general
    panic. This amounts to up to 3000 deaths per week. In fact, this
    figure could be even higher, as the British Covid19 definition also
    [includes](https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/deaths/bulletins/deathsregisteredweeklyinenglandandwalesprovisional/weekending3april2020)
    deaths *with* (rather than from) coronavirus as well as “suspected
    cases”. In addition, around 50% of “corona deaths”
    [involve](https://ltccovid.org/2020/04/12/mortality-associated-with-covid-19-outbreaks-in-care-homes-early-international-evidence/)
    nursing homes, which are not protected any better by a general
    lockdown.
  - In Denmark, the lockdown [is now
    regretted](https://jyllands-posten.dk/debat/breve/ECE12074246/vi-skulle-aldrig-have-trykket-paa-stopknappen/):
    “We should never have pressed the stop button. The Danish health
    care system had the situation under control. The total lockdown was
    a step too far,” argues Professor Jens Otto Lunde Jørgensen of
    Aarhus University Hospital. Denmark is currently ramping up school
    operations again.
  - Yale professor David Katz, who warned early on of the negative
    consequences of a lockdown, gave a [detailed one-hour
    interview](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VK0Wtjh3HVA) on the
    current situation.
  - German virologist Hendrik Streeck [explains
    that](https://today.rtl.lu/news/science-and-environment/a/1498185.html)
    no “smear infections” in supermarkets, restaurants or hairdressing
    salons have been detected so far.
  - New antibody data from the Italian community of Robbio in Lombardy
    shows that about [ten times more
    people](https://www.tgcom24.mediaset.it/cronaca/a-robbio-pv-il-22-ha-o-ha-avuto-il-coronavirus-ok-del-sindaco-ai-test-per-tutti_17285128-202002a.shtml)
    had the corona virus than originally thought, as they developed no
    or only mild symptoms. The actual immunization rate is 22%.
  - New data from the Swiss Canton of Zurich [shows
    that](https://www.nzz.ch/zuerich/coronavirus-zuerich-aendert-nun-das-testregime-in-heimenauch-viele-aeltere-covid-19-infizierte-entwickeln-keine-symptome-zuerich-aendert-nun-das-testregime-in-heimen-ld.1552089)
    about 50% of all Covid19-related deaths occurred in retirement or
    nursing homes. Nevertheless, even there about 40% of all
    test-positive people showed no symptoms. The median age of
    test-positive deaths in Switzerland is currently about 84 years.
  - Pietro Vernazza, the Swiss chief physician for infectiology,
    comments on the [“live with the virus”
    strategy](https://infekt.ch/2020/04/exitstrategie-lockdown/) and
    recommends, among other things, individually optimised protection of
    persons at risk. The immunity of the general population is also a
    protection for people at risk, he says.
  - The new British website [Lockdown
    Skeptics](https://lockdownsceptics.org/) reports critically on
    Covid19, the measures taken and the general media coverage.
  - The Austrian civil society [“Initiative for evidence-based corona
    information”](https://www.initiative-corona.info/) provides an
    overview of studies and analyses on the new corona virus
  - Documentary: [“The WHO – In the grip of the
    lobbyists”](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dYlia_fQOLk) (ARTE,
    2017, German)

#### April 15, 2020

##### **Medical updates**

  - In the British *Telegraph*, Professor Alexander Kekulé, one of
    Germany’s leading microbiologists and epidemiologists, [calls for an
    end to the
    lockdown](https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2020/04/11/german-scientist-predicted-european-epidemic-calls-end-lockdown/)
    as it causes more damage than the virus itself. In people under 50
    years of age, severe disease or death are “very, very unlikely”. The
    general population should develop rapid immunity, while risk groups
    should be protected. One cannot wait for a vaccine, which will take
    at least six to twelve months, but must find a way to live with the
    virus, Professor Kekulé said.
  - The German Network for Evidence-Based Medicine reports that the
    lethality of a severe seasonal influenza (flu) such as 2017/2018 is
    [estimated](https://www.ebm-netzwerk.de/en/publications/covid-19) by
    the German Robert Koch Institute to be 0.4% to 0.5%, and not only
    0.1% as previously assumed. This would mean that the lethality of
    Covid19 could even be lower than that of a strong seasonal
    influenza, even though it may spread faster.
  - The Luxembourger *Tageblatt* [reports
    that](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/volksblatt_schweden_corona_20200414_18.pdf)
    Sweden’s “relaxed strategy on Covid19 seems to work”. Despite
    minimal measures, the situation seems to be “clearly calming down at
    the moment”. A huge field hospital that was set up near Stockholm
    remains closed due to lack of demand. The number of patients in
    intensive care units remains constant at a low level or is even
    slightly declining. “There are many vacancies in intensive care
    units in all Stockholm hospitals. We are approaching the flattening
    of the illness curve,” explained a senior physician at the
    Karolinska Klinik. So far there have been about 900 deaths *with*
    Covid19 in Sweden.
  - A direct comparison between the UK (with lockdown) and Sweden
    (without lockdown) shows that the two countries are [almost
    identical](http://www.theblogmire.com/a-comparison-of-lockdown-uk-with-non-lockdown-sweden/)
    in terms of case numbers and deaths per population.
  - A letter to the *New England Journal of Medicine* reports that in a
    study of pregnant women, 88% of test-positive women [showed no
    symptoms](https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMc2009316) – a
    very high figure, but one that is consistent with earlier reports
    from China and Iceland.
  - Professor Dan Yamin, director of the Epidemiology Research
    Laboratory at Tel Aviv University, [explains in an
    interview](https://www.ynet.co.il/articles/0,7340,L-5714371,00.html)
    that the new corona virus is “hardly dangerous” for a large part of
    the population and that rapid natural immunity must be the goal. The
    money is better spent on extending a clinic than on paying for
    damages due to the lockdown, he said.
  - The president of the Israeli National Research Council, Professor
    Isaac Ben-Israel, argues that according to current findings, the
    corona epidemic is over in most countries [after about 8
    weeks](https://www.timesofisrael.com/top-israeli-prof-claims-simple-stats-show-virus-plays-itself-out-after-70-days/),
    *regardless of the measures taken*. He therefore recommends to lift
    the “lockdown” immediately.
  - The British statistics professor David Spiegelhalter shows that the
    risk of death from Covid19 corresponds roughly [to normal
    mortality](https://medium.com/wintoncentre/how-much-normal-risk-does-covid-represent-4539118e1196)
    and is visibly increased only for the age group between approx. 70
    and 80 years (see the graph at the end of the linked article).
  - Professor Karin Moelling, emeritus director of the Institute of
    Virology at the University of Zurich and an[early critic of
    excessive
    measures](https://www.rubikon.news/artikel/die-stimme-der-vernunft),
    stresses in a[new
    interview](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4rl2sqLcDoQ) the role of
    local special factors such as air pollution and population density.
  - The British *Guardian* [pointed
    out](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/14/air-pollution-in-china-is-killing-4000-people-every-day-a-new-study-finds)
    in 2015 that extreme air pollution in Chinese cities kills 4000
    people *per day*. This is more than China has so far reported in
    *total* Covid19 deaths.
  - The German virologist Hendrik Streeck [has defended
    himself](https://www.tagesspiegel.de/wissen/virologe-streeck-zur-coronavirus-studie-die-veroeffentlichung-zu-heinsberg-war-nicht-leichtfertig/25735672.html)
    against criticism of his pilot study. Streeck found a lethality
    (based on cases) of 0.37% and a mortality (based on population) of
    0.06%, which corresponds to a strong seasonal flu.
  - Austrian internal medicine specialists [warn of “collateral
    damage”](https://wien.orf.at/stories/3044064): Due to the
    coronavirus, control and operation dates are postponed and fewer
    patients with heart attack symptoms come to the hospitals.
  - A Swiss biophysicist has for the first time [graphically
    depicted](https://swprs.org/rate-of-positive-covid19-tests/) the
    rate of positive Covid19 tests in Switzerland since early March. The
    result shows that the positive rate oscillates between about 10% and
    25% and that the “lockdown” has had no significant influence (see
    graph below). Interestingly, Swiss authorities and media have never
    shown this graph.
  - A Swiss researcher has analysed the latest Covid19 report of the
    Federal Office of Public Health and again comes to a[critical
    assessment](https://covid-19-fakten.blogspot.com/2020/04/der-bag-situationsbericht-vom-1442020.html):
    “The situation report is unsuitable for politicians and competent
    decision making, is highly unspecific, incomplete and lacking in
    informative value”.
  - In a new article, the Swiss chief physician for infectiology, Dr.
    Pietro Vernazza, [explains
    that](https://infekt.ch/2020/04/hinterlaesst-coronavirus-eine-immunitaet/)
    the alleged lack of immunity formation in Covid19 is a matter of
    “rare individual cases or even just clues”, which “on closer
    inspection do not pose a problem”, but which are “exaggerated and
    hastily dished up as shocking news” by some media.
  - In France, there are more and more[reports of
    suicides](https://www.midilibre.fr/2020/04/09/coronavirus-ces-suicides-de-malades-ou-de-personnes-tenaillees-par-langoisse,8839373.php)
    out of fear of the coronavirus or out of fear of having infected
    someone with the coronavirus.
  - The new French site [Covid Infos](https://covidinfos.net/)
    critically examines Covid19 and media reporting.

![Swiss positive test rate before and during lockdown
(FS)](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/fs-ch-pos-rate.png?w=600&h=383)

##### **US and UK**

  - On the US warship Theodore Roosevelt, 600 sailors tested positive
    for Covid19, and [a first sailor has since
    died](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/apr/14/sailor-dies-from-covid-19-and-600-test-positive-after-outbreak-on-uss-theodore-roosevelt-guam)
    *from or with* Covid19. The warship will be a very important “case
    study” for the impact on the healthy general population below 65.
  - The emeritus British professor of pathology, Dr John Lee, argues
    that a robust and evidence-based debate is needed to [avoid “big
    mistakes”](https://www.spectator.co.uk/article/to-understand-covid-we-need-evidence-scepticism-and-vigorous-debate).
    Many of the figures used by governments and the media have not been
    reliable, he says.
  - In the UK, 40% of hospital beds [are currently
    unoccupied](https://www.hsj.co.uk/acute-care/nhs-hospitals-have-four-times-more-empty-beds-than-normal/7027392.article),
    four times more than usual. The reason for this is the sharp decline
    in general patient admissions. Intensive care beds, whose capacity
    has been increased, are on average 78% occupied. In addition, 10% of
    nurses are in quarantine.
  - The temporary corona hospitals of the US military near New York are
    [“largely
    empty”](https://nypost.com/2020/04/09/usns-comfort-and-javits-center-mostly-empty-amid-coronavirus/)
    so far. The hospitalization rate in New York was overestimated [by a
    factor of
    seven](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/10/nyregion/new-york-coronavirus-hospitals.html).
  - A US study [comes to the
    conclusion](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.04.01.20050542v1)
    that the new corona virus has already spread much further than
    originally assumed, but causes no or only mild symptoms in most
    people, so that the lethality rate could be as low as 0.1%, which is
    roughly equivalent to seasonal flu. However, due to the fact that
    the disease is more easily transmitted, the cases of the disease in
    New York, for example, occurred [in a shorter time than
    usual](https://archive.is/7w2XE).
  - In a [new
    document](https://www.evms.edu/media/evms_public/departments/internal_medicine/EVMS_Critical_Care_COVID-19_Protocol.pdf)
    on the treatment of Covid19 patients, the chief of pneumology and
    intensive care at Eastern Virginia Medical School states: “It is
    important to recognize that COVID-19 does not cause your “typical
    ARDS” (lung failure) … this disease must be treated differently and
    it is likely we are exacerbating this situation by causing
    ventilator induced lung injury.”
  - In the US, a governor claimed an infant died “of Covid” as the
    world’s youngest victim. Family acquaintances, however, [stated
    that](https://www.washingtonexaminer.com/news/candace-owens-accuses-connecticut-governor-of-lying-about-coronavirus-death-calls-for-resignation)
    the infant had suffocated in a tragic accident at home and
    subsequently tested positive in hospital. The responsible coroner
    [did not
    declare](https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-8193487/Coroner-refuses-rule-COVID-19-cause-death-six-week-old-Connecticut-baby.html)
    a Covid death.
  - A doctor from the US state of Montana [explained in a
    speech](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V0lIWZpiRU0) how death
    certificates for suspected Covid19 cases are being manipulated due
    to new guidelines.

##### **Nursing homes**

  - An analysis of data from five European countries shows that
    residents of nursing homes have so far accounted for [between 42%
    and 57% of all “Covid19
    deaths”](https://ltccovid.org/2020/04/12/mortality-associated-with-covid-19-outbreaks-in-care-homes-early-international-evidence/).
    At the same time, three US studies show that up to 50% of all test
    positive nursing home residents did not (yet) show symptoms at the
    time of testing. Two conclusions can be drawn from this: On the one
    hand, the danger of the new coronavirus – as already suspected –
    seems to be concentrated on a small, very vulnerable population
    group that needs even better protection. On the other hand, it is
    conceivable that some of these people may not die, or not only die
    from the coronavirus, but also from the extreme stress associated
    with the current situation. Recent reports from Germany and Italy
    have already mentioned nursing home residents who died suddenly
    without symptoms.
  - A German palliative physician argues in a [recent
    interview](https://www.deutschlandfunk.de/palliativmediziner-zu-covid-19-behandlungen-sehr-falsche.694.de.html?dram:article_id=474488)
    that in the treatment of Covid19 patients “very wrong priorities
    were set and all ethical principles were violated”. There is a “very
    one-sided orientation towards intensive care”, although “the balance
    between benefit and harm” is often not good. A new diagnosis (i.e.
    Covid19) would turn elderly patients who in the past had mostly been
    treated palliatively into intensive care patients and subject them
    to a painful but often hopeless treatment (i.e. artificial
    respiration). The treatment should always be based on the actual
    will of the patient, the specialist argued.

![Covid19 deaths in nursing homes (LTC
Covid)](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/c19-nursing-homes.jpg?w=700&h=218)

##### **Political developments**

  - In Germany, a [medical lawyer](http://beatebahner.de/) who filed a
    complaint against the corona measures with the Federal
    Constitutional Court and called for demonstrations, was arrested and
    [sent to a prison psychiatric
    ward](https://www.rnz.de/nachrichten/heidelberg_artikel,-nach-aufruf-zu-corona-demo-heidelberger-anwaeltin-in-psychiatrischer-einrichtung-update-_arid,508747.html)
    for two days. The public prosecutor is investigating for “public
    provocation to commit crimes”. Another lawyer [asks in an open
    letter](https://archive.is/20200415172607/https://www.nachrichtenspiegel.de/2020/04/14/brief-an-die-bundesrechtsanwaltskammer-in-causa-bahmer/)
    to the German Federal Chamber of Lawyers: “Lawyers sent to
    psychiatric hospital for protest? Is it that time again in Germany?”
  - In Switzerland, a “corona critical” doctor was arrested by a special
    police unit for alleged “threats against relatives and authorities”
    and [sent to a psychiatric
    clinic](https://www.srf.ch/news/regional/aargau-solothurn/festnahme-von-corona-kritiker-verschwoerung-oder-normale-intervention-der-aargauer-behoerden).
    The family has since declared that there were *no* threats against
    relatives. The doctor also stated that he was *not* accused of
    “threats against authorities” during the interrogation. The police
    justified the deployment of the special unit by assuming that the
    doctor was in possession of a weapon – but this was the usual Swiss
    medical army pistol without ammunition. The transfer of the doctor
    to a psychiatric clinic was justified on the grounds of an alleged
    “incapacity to serve in prison” (as is the case of nursing
    patients) – this, too, may be seen as a pretext. Based on the
    current state of knowledge, it is therefore possible that the
    measure was indeed *politically motivated*. Former US Congresswoman
    Cynthia McKinney has already [drawn
    attention](https://twitter.com/cynthiamckinney/status/1250075810838581248)
    to the Swiss case.
  - Italy is now using [European satellite
    data](https://www.ansa.it/english/news/2020/04/06/coronavirus-italy-activates-satellite-to-monitor-nation-3_f2ffb30c-d550-42f5-82fc-ec1f82c5c625.html)
    to monitor the population during lockdown.
  - The British police [smashed in a resident’s
    door](https://twitter.com/BanTheBBC/status/1249598512427347969)
    looking for “social gatherings”.
  - German constitutional law expert Professor Oliver Lepsius: [“On the
    decline of fundamental rights in the corona
    pandemic”](https://verfassungsblog.de/vom-niedergang-grundrechtlicher-denkkategorien-in-der-corona-pandemie/).

#### April 12, 2020

##### **New studies**

  - Stanford professor of medicine John Ioannidis concludes [in a new
    study](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.04.05.20054361v1)
    that the risk of death from Covid19 for people under 65 years of
    age, even in global “hotspots”, is equivalent to the risk of a fatal
    car accident for daily commuters driving between 9 and 400 miles.
  - In a [serological pilot
    study](https://www.t-online.de/gesundheit/krankheiten-symptome/id_87680236/lockerung-der-corona-massnahmen-ergebnisse-der-heinsberg-studie-machen-hoffnung.html),
    German virologist Hendrick Streeck comes to the interim result that
    the lethality of Covid19 is at 0.37% and the mortality (based on the
    total population) at 0.06%. These values are about ten times lower
    than those of the WHO and about five times lower than those of Johns
    Hopkins University.
  - A Danish study with 1500 blood donors found that the lethality of
    Covid19 is [only 1.6 per
    thousand](https://www.dr.dk/nyheder/indland/doedelighed-skal-formentlig-taelles-i-promiller-danske-blodproever-kaster-nyt-lys),
    i.e. more than 20 times lower than originally assumed by the WHO and
    thus in the range of a strong (pandemic) influenza. At the same time
    Denmark [has
    decided](https://www.thelocal.dk/20200406/denmark-to-reopen-schools-and-kindergartens-next-week)
    to reopen schools and kindergartens next week.
  - A serological study in the US state of Colorado comes to the
    [preliminary
    conclusion](https://reason.com/2020/04/08/mass-antibody-testing-in-this-rural-colorado-county-sheds-light-on-covid-19s-prevalence-and-lethality/)
    that the lethality of Covid19 has been overestimated by a factor of
    5 to a factor of 20 and is likely to be in the range between normal
    and pandemic influenza.
  - A study conducted by the Medical University of Vienna concluded that
    the age and risk profile of Covid19 deaths is [similar to normal
    mortality](https://www.vienna.at/analyse-zeigt-covid-19-opferkurve-entspricht-normaler-mortalitaet/6581246).
  - A study in the Journal of Medical Virology concludes that the
    internationally used coronavirus test [is
    unreliable](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32219885): In
    addition to the already known problem of false positive results,
    there is also a “potentially high” rate of false negative results,
    i.e. the test does not respond even in symptomatic individuals,
    while in other patients it does respond once  and then again not.
    This makes it more difficult to exclude other flu-like illnesses.
  - A Swiss biophysicist has for the first time evaluated and
    [graphically
    displayed](https://swprs.org/rate-of-positive-covid19-tests/) the
    rate of positive tests in the US, France, Germany and Switzerland.
    The result shows that the positive rate in these countries is
    increasing rather slowly and not exponentially.
  - Dr. Daniel Jeanmonod, emeritus Swiss professor of physiology and
    neurosurgery, recommends in an analysis: “[Think deep, do good
    science, and do not
    panic\!](https://off-guardian.org/2020/04/07/think-deep-do-good-science-and-do-not-panic/)“
  - US researchers conclude that local air pollution [greatly
    increases](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.04.05.20054502v1)
    the risk of death from Covid19. This confirms earlier studies from
    Italy and China.
  - The WHO concluded at the end of March that, contrary to earlier
    assumptions, Covid19 is [not transmitted by
    aerosols](https://www.who.int/news-room/commentaries/detail/modes-of-transmission-of-virus-causing-covid-19-implications-for-ipc-precaution-recommendations)
    (“through the air”). Transmission mainly takes place through direct
    contact or by droplet infection (coughing, sneezing).
  - The German-American epidemiology professor Knut Wittkowski argues in
    a [new interview](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ARTf4bpiXuI) that
    the Covid19 epidemic is already declining or even “already over” in
    many countries. The curfews had come too late and had been
    counterproductive, Wittkowski argues.

##### **European Mortality Monitoring**

[European mortality
monitoring](https://www.euromomo.eu/outputs/zscore_country_total.html)
now shows a clear projected excess mortality in the over-65 age group in
several European countries. In some countries, however, including
Germany and Austria, mortality in this age group is still in the normal
range (or even below).

The question remains open as to whether the partially increased
mortality is due to the coronavirus alone or also due to the sometimes
drastic measures taken (e.g. isolation, stress, cancelled operations,
etc.), and whether mortality will still be increased in the annual view.

Among the age groups under 65 years, so far only in England there is a
projected increase in mortality beyond earlier waves of influenza. The
median age of test-positive deceased is 80 in Italy, 83 in Germany and
84 in Switzerland.

##### **Switzerland**

  - According to the [latest
    report](https://www.bag.admin.ch/bag/de/home/krankheiten/ausbrueche-epidemien-pandemien/aktuelle-ausbrueche-epidemien/novel-cov/situation-schweiz-und-international.html)
    of the Federal Office of Public Health, the median age of
    test-positive deceased is now 84 years. The number of hospitalised
    patients remains constant.
  - A study by ETH Zurich [found
    that](https://www.tagesanzeiger.ch/ansteckungsraten-flachten-bereits-vor-dem-lockdown-ab-809893127675)
    the infection rate in Switzerland fell to a stable value of 1
    *several days before* the “lockdown”, presumably due to general
    hygiene and everyday measures. If this result is correct, it would
    fundamentally question the sense of a “lockdown”. ([About the
    study](https://bsse.ethz.ch/cevo/research/sars-cov-2/real-time-monitoring-in-switzerland.html))
  - The Swiss magazine *Infosperber* criticizes the information policy
    of authorities and the media: “[Instead of informing, authorities
    conduct a PR
    campaign](https://www.infosperber.ch/Artikel/Gesundheit/Corona-Statt-zu-informieren-fuhren-Behorden-eine-PR-Kampagne)“.
    Misleading figures and graphics are used to spread at least partly
    unjustified fear.
  - The Swiss consumer protection magazine *Ktipp* also criticises the
    information policy and media reporting: “[Authorities provide
    misleading
    information](https://www.ktipp.ch/artikel/artikeldetail/behoerden-informieren-irrefuehrend/)“.
  - A Swiss researcher has analysed the latest Covid19 report of the
    Federal Office of Public Health and comes to a [very critical
    conclusion](https://covid-19-fakten.blogspot.com/2020/04/die-analyse-des-aktuellen.html):
    the report is “scientifically unbalanced, patronising and
    misleading”. In consideration of the facts, the measures taken by
    authorities are “irresponsible and inducing fear”.
  - In an [open letter to the Swiss Minister of
    Health](https://www.rontalpraxis.ch/aktuelles), Swiss doctors speak
    of a “discrepancy between the threat scenario, which has been
    fuelled above all by the media, and our reality. The Covid19 cases
    observed in the general population were few and mostly mild, but
    “anxiety disorders and panic attacks” are on the increase in the
    population and many patients no longer dare to come to important
    examination appointments. “And this in connection with a virus whose
    dangerous­ness, according to our perception, exists in Switzerland
    only in the media and in our heads.”
  - Due to the very low patient workload, several clinics in
    [Switzerland](https://www.20min.ch/schweiz/news/story/Spitaeler-28949526)
    and
    [Germany](https://www.spiegel.de/wirtschaft/unternehmen/trotz-corona-pandemie-warum-kliniken-jetzt-kurzarbeit-anmelden-a-3dc61bc9-fb12-4298-8022-bb4c2be39d7d)
    have now had to announce short-time work. The decrease in patients
    is up to 80%.
  - The Swiss physician Dr. Paul Robert Vogt has written a [highly
    shared
    article](https://www.mittellaendische.ch/2020/04/07/covid-19-eine-zwischenbilanz-oder-eine-analyse-der-moral-der-medizinischen-fakten-sowie-der-aktuellen-und-zuk%C3%BCnftigen-politischen-entscheidungen/)
    on Covid19. He criticizes a “sensationalistic press”, but also warns
    that this is not an “ordinary flu”. However, the physician is wrong
    in some points: lethality rate and median age are very much key
    variables, differentiation between with/by coronavirus is essential,
    respiratory masks and respirators are unsuitable in many cases (see
    below), and curfews are a questionable and possibly
    counterproductive measure.

##### **Germany and Austria**

  - In a new paper, German health experts [criticise the crisis
    policy](https://www.tagesschau.de/investigativ/ndr-wdr/corona-experten-thesenpapier-101.html)
    of the Federal Government. They speak of long-term damage to the
    population caused by the partial shutdown. The figures published by
    the RKI were “only of limited significance”.
  - In a statement, the Federal Association of German Pathologists
    [demands
    that](https://www.pathologie-dgp.de/die-dgp/aktuelles/meldung/pressemitteilung-an-corona-verstorbene-sollten-obduziert-werden/)
    there must be autopsies of “corona deaths” (in order to determine
    the true cause of death) and thus explicitly contradicts “the
    recommendation of the Robert Koch Institute”, which spoke out
    against autopsies, allegedly because they were too dangerous.
  - Dr. Martin Sprenger [resigned his
    position](https://mailchi.mp/addendum/fles-home-office-260342) in
    the Corona Expert Council of the Austrian Ministry of Health in
    order to “regain his civil and scientific freedom of opinion”. Dr.
    Sprenger previously criticized, among other things, that the
    government did not sufficiently differentiate the risk of the virus
    for different population groups and took [too sweeping
    measures](https://www.addendum.org/coronavirus/interview-sprenger/):
    “We must be careful that the loss of healthy life years due to
    inadequate care for other acute and chronic diseases is not a factor
    of 10 times higher than the loss of healthy life years caused by
    COVID-19”.
  - In a German nursing home, an 84-year-old man tested positive for
    Covid19, after which the entire home was quarantined and mass tests
    were conducted. The initial test result later turned out[to be
    false](https://www.schwerin.de/news/4a3e5560-78c9-11ea-b543-1967de695b51/),
    however.

##### **Scandinavia**

  - The Norwegian Medical Association writes in an open letter to the
    Minister of Health that they are concerned that the measures taken
    could be [more dangerous than the
    virus](https://www.abcnyheter.no/helse-og-livsstil/helse/2020/04/06/195667780/nesten-halvparten-av-sengene-pa-oslo-universitetssykehus-star-tomme),
    as normal patients are no longer being examined and treated.
  - A Swedish author [explains in the British
    *Spectator*](https://www.spectator.co.uk/article/no-lockdown-please-w-re-swedish):
    “It is not Sweden that is conducting a mass experiment. It is all
    other countries that are doing it.”
  - Professor Ansgar Lohse, Director at the Hamburg University Hospital,
    [explains in an
    interview](https://www.abendblatt.de/hamburg/article228880917/uke-professor-shutdown-lohse-deutschland-hamburg-corona-virus-infektion-covid-19-impfstoff-coronavirus-krise-patienten-immunitaet-krankenhaeuser-kontaktverbot-kliniken-infektionsrate.html):
    “In my opinion, the Swedish measures are the most rational in the
    world. Of course, the question arises whether this can be kept up
    psychologically. Initially, the Swedes have to reckon with
    significantly more deaths, but in the medium to long term these will
    then be significantly reduced. The bill will be paid in a year – if
    the Swedes can hold out. Unfortunately, the fear of the virus often
    forces politicians to take actions that are not necessarily
    reasonable. Politics is driven also by the images in the media.”
  - According to Swedish chief epidemiologist Anders Tegnell, Stockholm
    may now have  reached a “plateau” with regard to Covid infections.
    ([More news about
    Sweden](https://www.thelocal.se/20200310/timeline-how-the-coronavirus-has-developed-in-sweden))

##### **US and Asia**

  - In the US, the authorities now [also
    recommend](https://nypost.com/2020/04/07/feds-classify-all-coronavirus-patient-deaths-as-covid-19-deaths/?link=TD_mansionglobal_new_mansion_global.11147f181987fd93)
    that all test-positive deaths and even suspect cases *without* a
    positive test result be registered as “Covid deaths”. An American
    physician and state senator from Minnesota [declared
    that](https://www.valleynewslive.com/content/misc/Sen-Dr-Jensens-Shocking-Admission-About-Coronavirus-569458361.html)
    this was tantamount to manipulation. Furthermore, there would be
    financial incentives for hospitals to declare patients as Covid19
    patients. (Some
    [humour](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/cv-2019-2020.jpg)
    on this topic).
  - A Covid19 field hospital near Seattle in Washington State was closed
    after only three days [without admitting any
    patients](https://www.yahoo.com/news/armys-seattle-field-hospital-closes-165646379.html).
    This is reminiscent of the hospitals built at short notice near
    Wuhan, which were also mostly under-utilized or even empty and were
    then
    [dismantled](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/feb/12/what-chinas-empty-new-coronavirus-hospitals-say-about-its-secretive-system)
    after a short time.
  - Numerous media reported on alleged “corona mass graves” on Hart
    Island near New York. These reports are misleading in two respects:
    firstly, Hart Island has long been one of the best-known
    “[cemeteries of the
    poor](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hart_Island_\(Bronx\)#Cemetery)”
    in the US, and secondly the mayor of New York
    [declared](https://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/americas/new-york-coronavirus-cases-burials-bodies-covid-19-hart-island-a9459956.html)
    that no mass graves are planned, but that “unclaimed” deceased (i.e.
    without relatives) are to be buried on Hart Island.
  - One of the leading Indian epidemiologists said that “[We cannot run
    away to the
    moon](https://www.business-standard.com/article/current-affairs/we-cannot-run-away-to-the-moon-need-to-develop-herd-immunity-dr-muliyil-120040601232_1.html)“.
    He recommends the rapid development of a natural immunity in the
    population.

##### **Northern Italy**

Regarding northern Italy, several potential risk factors have recently
been discussed.

It is true that two major vaccination campaigns against
[influenza](https://www.bergamonews.it/2019/10/21/vaccinazione-antinfluenzale-a-bergamo-ordinate-185-000-dosi-di-vaccino/332164/)
and
[meningococcus](https://www.bsnews.it/2020/01/18/meningite-vaccinate-34mila-persone-tra-brescia-e-bergamo/)
were carried out in Lombardy in the months immediately preceding the
outbreak of Covid19, notably in the later hotspots of Bergamo and
Brescia. Although it is *theoretically possible* that such vaccinations
could interact with coronavirus infections, such a possibility has not
been established at present.

It is also true that a [high asbestos
exposure](https://www.spiegel.de/panorama/justiz/asbest-prozess-in-italien-nun-sind-alle-krank-a-666421.html)
was present in northern Italy in the past, which increases the risk of
*cancerous* lung disease. But here again, there is no *direct
connection* with Covid19.

Nevertheless, in general it is true that the lung health of the
population in northern Italy has been affected for a long time by high
levels of [air
pollution](https://twitter.com/esa/status/1238480433047916545) and other
detrimental factors, making it [particularly
susceptible](https://www.thelocal.it/20170131/our-lungs-are-breaking-smog-levels-way-above-safe-limits-in-northern-italy)
to respiratory diseases.

![Winter smog (NO2) in Northern Italy in February 2020
(ESA)](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/03/italy-smog.png?w=500&h=281)

##### **Swiss chief physician Pietro Vernazza**

The Swiss chief physician of Infectiology, Professor Pietro Vernazza,
has published four new articles on studies concerning Covid19.

  - The [first
    article](https://infekt.ch/2020/04/schulen-schliessen-hilfreich-oder-nicht/)
    is about the fact that there has never been medical evidence for the
    efficacy of **school closures**, as children in general do not
    develop the Covid disease nor are they among the vectors of the
    virus (unlike with influenza).
  - The [second
    article](https://infekt.ch/2020/04/atemschutzmasken-fuer-alle-medienhype-oder-unverzichtbar/)
    is about the fact that **respiratory masks** generally have no
    detectable effect, with one exception: sick people *with symptoms*
    (notably coughing) can reduce the spread of the virus. Otherwise the
    masks are rather symbolic or a “media hype”.
  - The [third
    article](https://infekt.ch/2020/04/corona-testen-testen-und-kein-ende/)
    deals with the question of **mass testing**. The conclusion of
    Professor Vernazza: “Anyone who has symptoms of a respiratory
    disease stays at home. The same applies to the flu. There is no
    added value in testing.”
  - The[fourth
    article](https://infekt.ch/2020/03/immunschwaeche-und-schwangerschaft-kein-covid-19-risikofaktor/)
    deals with the Covid19 **risk groups**. According to current
    knowledge, these include people with high blood pressure – it is
    suspected that the Covid19 virus uses cell receptors that are also
    responsible for regulating blood pressure. However, surprisingly,
    people with immunodeficiency and pregnant women (who naturally have
    a reduced immune system) are not at risk. On the contrary, the risk
    of Covid19 is often an *overreaction* of the immune system.

##### **Intensive vs. palliative care**

A German palliative physician [explains in an
interview](https://www.ruhr24.de/ruhrgebiet/coronavirus-behandlung-intensivstation-nrw-lungenentzuendung-matthias-thoens-witten-zr-13645038.html)
that Covid19 is “not an intensive care disease”, as the severely
affected people are typically people of old age who have multiple
pre-existing conditions. When these people get pneumonia, they “have
always been given palliative care (i.e. accompanying death)”. With a
Covid19 diagnosis, however, this would now become an intensive care
case, but “of course the patients still cannot be saved”.

The expert describes the current actions of many decision-makers as
“panic mode”. At present, intensive care beds in Germany are still
relatively empty. Respirators are free. For financial reasons, hospital
managers may soon come up with the idea of admitting elderly people. “In
14 days, the wards will be full of unsalvageable, multimorbid old
people. And once they are on the machines, the question arises as to who
will switch them off again, as that would be a homicide.” An “ethical
catastrophe” from greed may ensue, warns the physician.

##### **Ventilation with Covid19**

There has been and still is a worldwide rush for ventilators for Covid19
patients. This site was one of the first in the world to draw attention
to the fact that invasive ventilation (intubation) may be
counterproductive in many cases and may cause additional harm to
patients.

Invasive ventilation was originally recommended because low oxygen
levels led to the false conclusion of acute respiratory (lung) failure,
and there was a fear that with more gentle, non-invasive techniques the
virus could spread through aerosols.

In the meantime, several leading pulmonologists and intensive care
physicians from the US and Europe have spoken out against invasive
ventilation and recommend more gentle methods or indeed oxygen therapy,
as already successfully used by South Korea.

  - [Why Some Doctors Are Now Moving Away From Ventilator
    Treatments](https://time.com/5818547/ventilators-coronavirus/)
    (TIME)
  - [Ventilators aren’t a panacea for a pandemic like
    coronavirus](https://www.spectator.co.uk/article/Ventilators-aren-t-a-panacea-for-a-pandemic-like-coronavirus)
    (Dr. Matt Strauss)
  - [With ventilators running out, doctors say the machines are overused
    for
    Covid-19](https://www.statnews.com/2020/04/08/doctors-say-ventilators-overused-for-covid-19/)
  - [Covid-19 Does Not Lead to a “Typical” Acute Respiratory Distress
    Syndrome](https://www.atsjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1164/rccm.202003-0817LE)
    (ATSJ)
  - [Do COVID-19 Ventilator Protocols Need a Second
    Look?](https://www.medscape.com/viewarticle/928156) (Medscape)
  - **German**: [„Too often intubation and invasive ventilation is
    used“](https://www.vpneumo.de/fileadmin/pdf/f2004071.007_Voshaar.pdf)
    (Dr. Thomas Voshaar)
  - **German**: [COVID-19: Ventilation – and then
    what?](https://www.doccheck.com/de/detail/articles/26271-covid-19-beatmung-und-dann)
    (DocCheck)

##### **Political developments**

  - NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden warns in a new interview that
    governments are using the coronavirus to build an “[architecture of
    oppression](https://www.vice.com/en_us/article/bvge5q/snowden-warns-governments-are-using-coronavirus-to-build-the-architecture-of-oppression)“.
  - Apple and Google have announced that they will work with national
    authorities to incorporate a so-called “[contact
    tracing](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-04-10/apple-google-bring-covid-19-contact-tracing-to-3-billion-people)”
    into their mobile operating systems, which will allow authorities to
    monitor contacts within the population.
  - German constitutional law expert Uwe Volkmann said on *ARD* that he
    knows “[nobody](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DvzrGLvzllU)” among
    his colleagues who considers the Corona measures to be in conformity
    with the constitution.
  - The Italian government has set up a “task force” to
    “[eliminate](https://www.faz.net/aktuell/feuilleton/medien/corona-in-italien-das-virus-und-die-wahrheit-16714529.html)”
    false reports about Covid on the Internet. However, freedom of
    expression remains “untouched”, it was said.
  - France has extended, due to Covid, the permitted pre-trial detention
    and
    [suspended](https://www.lefigaro.fr/politique/coronavirus-le-conseil-d-etat-sur-la-ligne-de-crete-des-libertes-publiques-20200406)
    the examination by a judge. Complaints by lawyers’ associations were
    rejected.
  - Denmark introduced “[unprecedentedly tough emergency
    laws](https://www.fr.de/politik/coronavirus-sars-cov-2-daenemark-notfalls-militaer-13598503.html)”
    at the beginning of April: “The health authorities can now order
    compulsory tests, compulsory vaccinations and compulsory treatment,
    and use the military and private security services in addition to
    the police to enforce their orders.”
  - The police in the German state of North Rhine-Westphalia are
    [testing
    drones](https://rp-online.de/nrw/panorama/nrw-polizei-testet-drohnen-bei-einsaetzen-wegen-corona-massnahmen_aid-50006143)
    in “corona missions”, specifically to search for prohibited groups
    of people.
  - The German state of Saxony wants to put quarantine objectors in
    [psychiatric
    hospitals](https://www.welt.de/politik/deutschland/article207198029/Coronavirus-Sachsen-will-Quarantaene-Verweigerer-in-Psychiatrien-sperren.html).
  - A Swiss doctor critical of corona measures has been arrested and
    [sent to
    psychiatry](https://www.srf.ch/news/regional/aargau-solothurn/festnahme-von-corona-kritiker-verschwoerung-oder-normale-intervention-der-aargauer-behoerden)
    for “making threats against authorities and relatives”, the Swiss
    police said.
  - In Germany, an attorney in medical law has filed a constitutional
    complaint against the Corona measures and published an open letter
    on the subject, in which she warns against slipping into a police
    state and called for demonstrations. The public prosecutor’s office
    and the police then [started
    investigations](https://www.morgenweb.de/mannheimer-morgen_artikel,-coronavirus-aufruf-zu-straftaten-ermittlungen-gegen-heidelberger-rechtsanwaeltin-_arid,1627078.html)
    against the lawyer for “calling for a criminal offence”, and the
    lawyer’s website was temporarily shut down. The constitutional
    complaint has since been rejected.
  - In Austria, too, several lawyers have now [lodged
    complaints](https://wien.orf.at/stories/3043172/) against the Corona
    measures with the Constitutional Court. The lawyers argue that
    fundamental rights and separation of powers have been violated by
    the measures.
  - The mayor of Los Angeles [promised a
    reward](https://townhall.com/tipsheet/bethbaumann/2020/04/04/la-mayor-garcetti-says-snitches-get-rewards-for-ratting-out-their-neighbors-n2566348)
    for “snitches” who report their neighbours to the authorities if
    they violate the curfews.
  - In the US, more than 16 million people are already [unemployed due
    to the
    lockdown](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/09/us/coronavirus-us-news.html),
    which is about 10% of the working population. According to the
    International Labor Organization, 80% of the world’s 3.3 billion
    workers are currently affected by the measures, and 1.25 billion
    workers could be affected by “[drastic or
    catastrophic](https://www.ilo.org/global/about-the-ilo/newsroom/news/WCMS_740893/lang--en/index.htm)”
    consequences.

![Weekly new unemployment claims in the
US.](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/us-jobless-claims.png?w=600&h=375)

#### April 7, 2020

  - The[latest figures from a special
    report](https://multipolar-magazin.de/artikel/coronavirus-regierung-ignoriert-daten)
    by the German Robert Koch Institute show that the so-called positive
    rate (i.e. the number of test positives per number of tests) is
    increasing much more slowly than the exponential curves shown by the
    media and was only around 10% at the end of March, a value that is
    rather typical for corona viruses. According to the magazine
    *Multipolar*, there can therefore be “no question of a dangerously
    rapid spread of the virus”.
  - Professor Klaus Püschel, head of forensic medicine in Hamburg,
    [explains about
    Covid19](https://www.pressreader.com/germany/hamburger-morgenpost/20200403/281487868456736):
    “This virus influences our lives in a completely excessive way. This
    is disproportionate to the danger posed by the virus. And the
    astronomical economic damage now being caused is not commensurate
    with the danger posed by the virus. I am convinced that the Corona
    mortality rate will not even show up as a peak in annual mortality.”
    In Hamburg, for example, “not a single person who was not previously
    ill” had died of the virus: “All those we have examined so far had
    cancer, a chronic lung disease, were heavy smokers or severely
    obese, suffered from diabetes or had a cardiovascular disease. The
    virus was the last straw that broke the camel’s back, so to speak.
    “Covid-19 is a fatal disease only in exceptional cases, but in
    most cases it is a predominantly harmless viral infection.”  
    In addition, [Dr. Püschel
    explains](https://www.abendblatt.de/hamburg/article228828787/rechtsmedizin-pueschel-hamburg-corona-virus-infektion-covid-19-coronavirus-krise-patienten-krankenhaeuser-kliniken-infektionsrate-krankheit-pandemie-test-lungenkrankheit-sars-cov-epidemie-sars-cov-2.html):
    “In quite a few cases, we have also found that the current corona
    infection has nothing whatsoever to do with the fatal outcome
    because other causes of death are present, for example a brain
    haemorrhage or a heart attack. Corona in itself is a “not
    particularly dangerous viral disease”, says the forensic scientist.
    He pleads for statistics based on concrete examination results. “All
    speculations about individual deaths that have not been expertly
    examined only fuel anxiety.” Contrary to the guidelines of the
    Robert Koch Institute, Hamburg had recently started to differentiate
    between deaths “with the” and “by the” coronavirus, which led to a
    decrease in Covid19 deaths.
  - The German virologist Hendrik Streeck is currently conducting a
    pilot study to determine the distribution and transmission routes of
    the Covid19 pathogen. In [an interview he
    explains](https://www.zeit.de/wissen/gesundheit/2020-04/hendrik-streeck-covid-19-heinsberg-symptome-infektionsschutz-massnahmen-studie/komplettansicht):
    “I took a closer look at the cases of 31 of the 40 people who died
    in the Heinsberg district – and was not very surprised that these
    people died. One of the deceased was older than 100 years, so even a
    common cold could have led to death.” Contrary to original
    assumptions, Streeck has *not* been able to prove transmission via
    door handles and the like (i.e. so-called smear infections).
  - The first Swiss hospitals have to [announce short-time
    work](https://www.engadinerpost.ch/2020/4/04/Engadiner-Spitaeler-haben-freie-Kapazitaeten)
    due to the very low capacity utilization: “The staff in all
    departments has too little to do and has reduced overtime in a first
    step. Now short-time work is also being registered. The financial
    consequences are severe.” As a reminder, a study by ETH Zurich based
    on largely unrealistic assumptions [predicted the first
    bottlenecks](https://www.toponline.ch/news/coronavirus/detail/news/studie-bestaetigt-engpass-bei-spitalbetten-steht-kurz-bevor-00131333/)
    in Swiss clinics by April 2. So far this has not happened anywhere.
  - In Switzerland, there was a pronounced wave of influenza at the
    beginning of 2017. At that time, there were almost [1500 additional
    deaths](https://www.srf.ch/news/schweiz/todesursachen-statistik-woran-die-meisten-schweizerinnen-und-schweizer-sterben)
    in the over 65-year-old population in the first six weeks of the
    year. Normally, around [1300
    people](https://www.nzz.ch/lungenentzuendung-1.4550285) die in
    Switzerland every year as a result of pneumonia, 95% of whom are
    over 65 years old. By comparison, a total of [762
    deaths](https://www.corona-data.ch/) with (not caused by) Covid19
    are currently reported in Switzerland.
  - The managing director of a German environmental laboratory suspects
    that the inhabitants of the northern Italian region of Lombardy are
    [particularly susceptible to viral
    infections](https://m.apotheke-adhoc.de/nachrichten/detail/coronavirus/erhoehen-legionellen-die-todesrate-einer-corona-infektion/)
    such as Covid19 due to a notoriously high legionella contamination:
    “If the lungs are weakened by a viral infection, as in the current
    situation, bacteria have an easy job, can negatively influence the
    course of the disease and cause complications.” In Lombardy,
    regional pneumonia outbreaks had already occurred in the past due to
    evaporation cooling systems contaminated with legionella.
  - On the basis of information from China, medical protocols have been
    defined worldwide that rapidly provide **invasive artificial
    respiration by intubation** for test-positive intensive care
    patients. On the one hand, the protocols assume that a more gentle
    non-invasive ventilation through a mask is too weak, on the other
    hand there is the fear that the “dangerous virus” could otherwise
    spread through aerosols. As early as March, however, German
    physicians [pointed out
    that](https://www.doccheck.com/de/detail/articles/26271-covid-19-beatmung-und-dann)
    intubation can lead to additional lung damage and has an overall
    poor chance of success. In the meantime, US physicians have also
    come forward who describe intubation as [“more harm than
    good”](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k9GYTc53r2o) for patients.
    Patients often do not suffer from acute lung failure, but rather
    from a kind of altitude sickness, which is made worse by artificial
    respiration with increased pressure. In February, [South Korean
    physicians reported
    that](https://www.upi.com/Top_News/World-News/2020/02/14/Oxygen-therapy-working-for-coronavirus-patient-Seoul-says/6651581696794/)
    critical Covid19 patients respond well to oxygen therapy without a
    ventilator. The US physician mentioned above warns that the use of
    ventilators must be urgently reconsidered in order not to cause
    additional damage.
  - The official US Covid19 projections so far [have
    overestimated](https://twitter.com/NikolovScience/status/1246823479820693505)
    hospitalisations by a factor of 8, ICU beds needed by a factor of
    6.4, and ventilators needed by a factor of 40.5.
  - Renowned US statistician Nate Silver explains why “[coronavirus case
    counts are
    meaningless](https://fivethirtyeight.com/features/coronavirus-case-counts-are-meaningless/)“,
    unless you know more about the number and way of testing.

##### **Further notes**

  - The [website of Dr. Wolfgang Wodarg](http://wodarg.com/), one of the
    earliest and internationally best known critics of the Covid19
    panic, [was deleted](https://twitter.com/wodarg) for a few hours
    today by the German provider Jimdo and only went online again after
    strong protests. It is not known whether the temporary deletion was
    due to general complaints or a political instruction.
  - The university email address of emeritus professor Dr. Sucharit
    Bhakdi, who wrote an [Open Letter to Chancellor Angela
    Merkel](https://swprs.org/open-letter-from-professor-sucharit-bhakdi-to-german-chancellor-dr-angela-merkel/),
    was deactivated earlier, but was also reactivated after protests.
  - On April 2, the Danish Parliament adopted [a new
    law](https://www.ft.dk/ripdf/samling/20191/lovforslag/l157/20191_l157_som_vedtaget.pdf)
    that allows the authorities to block “fraudulent” websites on
    Covid19 without an initial court order and to impose a higher
    penalty on the operators. It is still unclear what this means for
    generally critical websites about Covid19 and government policy in
    this regard.
  - The German author and journalist Harald Wiesendanger writes in an
    article [that his profession is completely failing in the current
    crisis](https://www.nachrichten-fabrik.de/news/harald-wiesendanger-ueber-die-massenmedien-waehrend-der-corona-krise-ich-schaeme-mich---meines-berufsstands-152103):
    “How a profession that is supposed to control the powerful as an
    independent, critical, impartial Fourth Estate can succumb as
    quickly as lightning to the same collective hysteria as its
    audience, almost unanimously, and give itself over to court
    reporting, government propaganda and expert deification: It’s
    incomprehensible to me, it disgusts me, I’ve had enough of it, I
    dissociate myself from this unworthy performance with complete
    shame.
  - Currently, [more than one third of humanity is in a
    “lockdown”](https://www.sciencealert.com/one-third-of-the-world-s-population-are-now-restricted-in-where-they-can-go),
    which is more people than lived during the Second World War.
  - In the US, applications for unemployment benefits have [skyrocketed
    to over six
    million](https://www.reuters.com/article/us-health-coronavirus-usa-layoffs/us-weekly-jobless-claims-seen-at-record-high-again-idUSKBN21K0FX)
    (see chart), a figure unparalleled since the Great Depression of
    1929.
  - More than one hundred human rights and civil liberties organizations
    warn that the world is currently [sleepwalking into a surveillance
    state](https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-8181381/World-sleepwalking-surveillance-state-rights-groups-warn.html).
    On Twitter, the hashtag \#covid19 has been partially replaced by the
    hashtag \#covid1984.
  - US geostrategist Henry Kissinger writes in the *Wall Street
    Journal*, “[The coronavirus pandemic will forever alter the world
    order](https://www.wsj.com/articles/the-coronavirus-pandemic-will-forever-alter-the-world-order-11585953005).”
    The U.S. must “protect” its citizens from disease while starting
    “the urgent work of planning for a new epoch”.

#### April 5, 2020

  - In a [40-minute
    interview](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lGC5sGdz4kg), the
    internationally renowned epidemiology professor Knut Wittkowski from
    New York explains that the measures taken on Covid19 are all
    counterproductive. Instead of “social distancing”, school closures,
    “lock down”, mouth masks, mass tests and vaccinations, life must
    continue as undisturbed as possible and immunity must be built up in
    the population as quickly as possible. According to all findings to
    date, Covid-19 is no more dangerous than previous influenza
    epidemics. Isolation now would only cause a “second wave” later.
  - The British Medical Journal (BMJ) [reports
    that](https://www.bmj.com/content/369/bmj.m1375), according to the
    latest data from China, 78% of new test-positive individuals show no
    symptoms. An Oxford epidemiologist said that these findings are
    “very, very important.” He added that if the results are
    representative, “then we have to ask, ‘What the hell are we locking
    down for?’”
  - Dr. Andreas Sönnichsen, head of the Department of General and Family
    Medicine at the Medical University of Vienna and chairman of the
    Network for Evidence-Based Medicine, considers the measures imposed
    so far [to be
    “insane”](https://www.diepresse.com/5794224/was-machen-wir-da-auf-den-intensivstationen-eigentlich).
    The whole state is being paralysed just to “protect the few it could
    affect”.
  - In a world first, the Swedish government [has
    announced](https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2020/04/03/coronavirus-swedish-experiment-could-prove-britain-wrong/)
    that it is going to officially distinguish between deaths “by” and
    deaths “with” the coronavirus, which should lead to a reduction in
    reported deaths. Meanwhile, for some reason, international pressure
    on Sweden to abandon its liberal strategy is steadily increasing.
  - The Hamburg health authority now has test-positive deaths examined
    by forensic medicine in order to count [only “real” corona
    deaths](https://www.t-online.de/nachrichten/deutschland/id_87636856/coronavirus-hamburg-will-nur-echte-covid-19-tote-zaehlen.html).
    As a result, the number of deaths has already been reduced by up to
    50% compared to the official figures of the Robert Koch Institute.
  - As early as 2018, the German Doctors Journal reported a [“multitude
    of pneumonia
    cases”](https://www.aerzteblatt.de/nachrichten/97750/Vielzahl-an-Lungenentzuendungen-beunruhigen-Behoerden-in-Norditalien)
    in northern Italy, which worried the authorities. At the time,
    contaminated drinking water was suspected to be one of the causes.
  - The German Pharmaceutical Newspaper[points
    out](https://www.pharmazeutische-zeitung.de/atemstillstand-koennte-auch-zentrale-ursache-haben-116664/)
    that in the current situation, patients often “fall seriously ill,
    even die, without having developed respiratory symptoms beforehand”.
    Neurologists suspect in this regard that the corona viruses could
    also damage nerve cells. Another explanation, however, would be that
    these patients, who are often in need of care, die due to the very
    high stress.
  - According to the [latest figures from
    Switzerland](https://www.bag.admin.ch/dam/bag/de/dokumente/mt/k-und-i/aktuelle-ausbrueche-pandemien/2019-nCoV/covid-19-lagebericht.pdf.download.pdf/COVID-19_Epidemiologische_Lage_Schweiz.pdf),
    the most common symptoms of test-positive patients in hospitals are
    fever, cough and breathing difficulties, while 43% or about 900
    people have pneumonia. Even in these cases, however, it is not *a
    priori* clear whether it was caused by the coronavirus or by other
    pathogens. The median age of the test positive deceased is 83 years,
    the range reaches up to 101 years.
  - The British project [“In
    Proportion”](http://inproportion2.talkigy.com/) tracks mortality
    “with” Covid19 in comparison to influenza mortality and all-cause
    mortality, which in Great Britain is still in the normal range or
    below and is currently decreasing.
  - In the US state of Indiana, calls to the mental health and suicide
    hotline [have
    increased](https://twitter.com/JesseKellyDC/status/1246449878219145216)
    by over 2000% from 1000 to 25,000 calls per day due to the lockdown
    and its economic impact.
  - The medical specialist portal Rxisk [points
    out](https://rxisk.org/medications-compromising-covid-infections/)
    that various drugs can increase the risk of infection with corona
    viruses by up to 200% in some cases.

##### **Further notes**

  - The British journalist Peter Hitchens describes in an article
    entitled [“We love Big
    Brother”](https://www.firstthings.com/web-exclusives/2020/04/we-love-big-brother)
    how even previously critical people were “infected by fear” despite
    the lack of medical evidence. In an interview, he explains that
    criticism is [“a moral
    duty”](https://www.spiked-online.com/podcast-episode/in-this-lockdown-dissent-is-a-moral-duty/)
    as fundamental rights are under threat
  - The German historian René Schlott writes about the “[Rendezvous with
    the police
    state](https://www.spiegel.de/politik/deutschland/corona-krise-und-buergerrechte-rendezvous-mit-dem-polizeistaat-a-68611322-f4d4-453f-aba5-5ec5a49ae329)“:
    “Buying a book, sitting on a park bench, meeting up with friends –
    that is now forbidden, is controlled and denounced. The democratic
    safeguards seem to be blown. Where and how will it end?”
  - Several German law firms are preparing lawsuits against the measures
    and regulations that have been issued. A specialist in medical law
    [writes in a press
    release](http://beatebahner.de/lib.medien/aktualisierte%20Pressemitteilung.pdf):
    “The measures taken by the federal and state governments are
    blatantly unconstitutional and violate a multitude of basic rights
    of citizens in Germany to an unprecedented extent. This applies to
    all corona regulations of the 16 federal states. In particular,
    these measures are not justified by the Infection Protection Act,
    which was revised in no time at all just a few days ago. () Because
    the available figures and statistics show that corona infection is
    harmless in more than 95% of the population and therefore does not
    represent a serious danger to the general public.”
  - The [Open
    Letter](https://swprs.org/open-letter-from-professor-sucharit-bhakdi-to-german-chancellor-dr-angela-merkel/)
    from Professor Sucharit Bhakdi to Chancellor Angela Merkel is now
    available in German, English, French, Spanish, Russian, Turkish,
    Dutch and Estonian, other languages will follow.
  - In a [new interview](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-pcQFTzck_c),
    NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden warns that Covid19 is dangerous but
    temporary, while the destruction of fundamental rights is deadly and
    permanent.

#### April 3, 2020

**USA**: [Videos by citizen
journalists](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5pIMD1enwd4) show that in
some hospitals described by US media as “war zones”, it is in fact still
very quiet. (Note: Some authors draw [unverified or false
conclusions](https://www.politifact.com/factchecks/2020/apr/03/facebook-posts/hospital-beds-being-kept-empty-prepare-covid-influ/).)

**Austria**: In Austria, too, “corona deaths” are apparently defined
“very liberally”, [as the media
report](https://www.heute.at/s/osterreich-bei-corona-todesstatistik-sehr-liberal-48665863):
“Do you also count as a corona death if you are infected with the virus
but die of something else? Yes, say Rudi Anschober and Bernhard Benka,
members of the Corona Task Force in the Ministry of Health. “There is a
clear rule at present: Died with the corona virus or died from the
corona virus both count for the statistics.” No difference is made as to
what the patient actually died of. In other words, a 90-year-old man who
dies with a fracture of the femoral neck and becomes infected with
corona in the hours prior to his death is also counted as corona death.
To name but one example.”

**Germany**: The German Robert Koch Institute now [advises against
autopsies](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gSn_YaOYYcY) of test-positive
deceased persons because the risk of droplet infection by aerosols is
allegedly too high. In many cases, this means that the real cause of
death can no longer be determined.

A specialist in pathology [comments on
this](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gSn_YaOYYcY) as follows: “Who
might think evil of it\! Up to now, it has been a matter of course for
pathologists to carry out autopsies with appropriate safety precautions
even in the case of infectious diseases such as HIV/AIDS, hepatitis,
tuberculosis, PRION diseases, etc. It is quite remarkable that in a
disease that is killing thousands of patients all over the world and
bringing the economy of entire countries to a virtual standstill, only
very few autopsy findings are available (six patients from China). From
the point of view of both the epidemic police and the scientific
community, there should be a particularly high level of public interest
in autopsy findings. However, the opposite is the case. Are you afraid
of finding out the true causes of death of the positively tested
deceased? Could it be that the numbers of corona deaths would then melt
away like snow in the spring sun?”

**Italy**: Russian experts have noticed [“strange
deaths”](https://de.sputniknews.com/panorama/20200402326767475-fachpersonal-todesfaelle-lombardei-zeitung/)
in nursing homes in Lombardy: “According to newspaper reports, several
cases have been registered in the town of Gromo in which alleged corona
virus-infected persons simply fell asleep and never woke up again. *No
real symptoms of the disease had been observed in the deceased until
then*. () As the director of the nursing home later clarified in an
interview with RIA Novosti, it is unclear whether the deceased were
actually infected with the coronavirus, because nobody in the home had
been tested for it. () In the homes, where medical and nursing teams
from Russia are working, corridors, bed rooms and dining rooms are
disinfected.”

Similar cases have already been
[reported](https://web.archive.org/web/20200330082928/https://www.sueddeutsche.de/panorama/coronavirus-news-deutschland-wolfsburg-laschet-1.4828033)
from Germany: Nursing patients without symptoms of illness die suddenly
in the current exceptional situation and are then considered “corona
deaths”. Here again the serious question arises: Who dies from the virus
and who dies from the sometimes extreme measures?

**Nursing staff**: The *Süddeutsche Zeitung*
[reports](https://www.sueddeutsche.de/politik/coronavirus-pflegekraefte-ausland-1.4866124):
“Throughout Europe, the pandemic is endangering the care of elderly
people at home because nursing staff can no longer visit them – or have
left the respective country in a hurry to return home.”

**Lastly**: Stanford professor of medicine Dr. Jay Bhattacharya gave a
[half-hour interview](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-UO3Wd5urg0) in
which he questions the “conventional wisdom” regarding Covid19. The
existing measures had been decided on the basis of very uncertain and
partly questionable data.

#### April 2, 2020 (I)

##### **USA**

A Swiss biophysicist [has visualized the
fact](https://swprs.org/rate-of-positive-covid19-tests/) that in the US
(as in the rest of the world), it is not the number of “infected” people
that is increasing exponentially, but the number of tests. The number of
test-positive people in relation to the number of tests remains constant
or increases slowly.

![Number of positive and negative tests (left) and percantage of
positive tests (right) (US
data)](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/ud-data-2-fs.png?w=736)

##### **Germany**

According to the [latest influenza
report](https://influenza.rki.de/Wochenberichte/2019_2020/2020-13.pdf)
of the German Robert Koch Institute, the number of acute respiratory
diseases has “fallen sharply nationwide”. The values have “dropped in
all age groups”.

By March 20, the total number of inpatient cases with acute respiratory
diseases had also fallen significantly. In the age group from 80 years
and older, the number of cases had almost halved compared to the
previous week.

In the 73 hospitals examined, 7% of all cases with respiratory diseases
were diagnosed with COVID-19. In the age groups 35-59 years it was 16%
and in the age group 60-79 years it was 13% who received a COVID-19
diagnosis.

These figures correspond to those from other countries as well as to the
typical prevalence of coronaviruses (5 to
15%).

<div class="tiled-gallery type-rectangular tiled-gallery-unresized" data-original-width="736" data-carousel-extra="{&quot;blog_id&quot;:132938956,&quot;permalink&quot;:&quot;https:\/\/swprs.org\/facts-about-covid19-march-2020-archive\/&quot;,&quot;likes_blog_id&quot;:132938956}" itemscope="" itemtype="http://schema.org/ImageGallery">

<div class="gallery-row" style="width: 736px; height: 175px;" data-original-width="736" data-original-height="175">

<div class="gallery-group images-1" style="width: 283px; height: 175px;" data-original-width="283" data-original-height="175">

<div class="tiled-gallery-item tiled-gallery-item-large" itemprop="associatedMedia" itemscope="" itemtype="http://schema.org/ImageObject">

[](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/rki-ili-kw13.png)

![Chřipková onemocnění (RKI, 13.kal.
týden)](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/rki-ili-kw13.png?w=279&h=171)

<div class="tiled-gallery-caption" itemprop="caption description">

Chřipková onemocnění (RKI, 13.kal.
týden)

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="gallery-group images-1" style="width: 453px; height: 175px;" data-original-width="453" data-original-height="175">

<div class="tiled-gallery-item tiled-gallery-item-large" itemprop="associatedMedia" itemscope="" itemtype="http://schema.org/ImageObject">

[](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/rki-sari-kw12.png)

![Akutní onemocnění dýchacích cest v
nemocnicích](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/rki-sari-kw12.png?w=449&h=171)

<div class="tiled-gallery-caption" itemprop="caption description">

Akutní onemocnění dýchacích cest v nemocnicích

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

Flu-like diseases in general (left) and acute respiratory diseases in
hospitals (right) (Robert-Koch-Institut, weeks 13 and 12)

An [article in DIE
ZEIT](https://www.zeit.de/wissen/2020-04/krankenhaeuser-kapazitaeten-coronavirus-patienten-deutschland/seite-2)
discusses the issue of intensive care patients in Germany:

“At present politicians, experts and many citizens observe with concern
the exponentially increasing number of people who are newly infected
every day. However, this is not the decisive indicator for assessing how
badly the corona crisis is and will hit Germany. For it is distorted
above all by the number of tests, which have been increasing for weeks.

In order to measure the burden on the health system, the number of those
who are so seriously ill that they need to be ventilated is particularly
important. As long as there are enough ventilation places for them, a
great many of them can be saved. Only when these beds become scarce does
a situation like the one in Italy threaten.

The DIVI register now shows that the situation in the German intensive
care units has been relaxed so far. “We are still in a comfortable
area,” says Grabenhenrich. The number of seriously ill patients is not
rising as steeply as the number of infected patients and even if it did,
it would still be possible to provide a large number of intensive care
beds with very good equipment.

##### **Switzerland**

The Swiss Federal Office of Public Health
[reports](https://www.bag.admin.ch/bag/de/home/krankheiten/ausbrueche-epidemien-pandemien/aktuelle-ausbrueche-epidemien/novel-cov/situation-schweiz-und-international.html)
that approximately 139,330 Covid19 tests have been carried out so far,
of which the result was positive in 15% of cases. This number also
corresponds to the typical corona virus value known from other countries
and, as far as can be seen, does not seem to be increasing rapidly in
Switzerland either.

Only the number of tests often mentioned in the media is increasing
exponentially, but not the number of “infected”, sick or even dead.

On March 31, however, a new [weekly mortality
statistic](https://www.bfs.admin.ch/bfs/de/home/statistiken/gesundheit/gesundheitszustand/sterblichkeit-todesursachen.html)
was published which for the first time forecasts an increase in overall
mortality in the 65+ age group in Switzerland for the 12th calendar week
(until 22 March) (see chart below). Specifically, total mortality is
expected to increase by around 200 deaths *per week*.

According to the Federal Office, this increase is “an expression of the
current pandemic”. The following problem arises here: up to 22 March
there were *a total* of [106 test-positive
deaths](https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/COVID-19-Pandemie_in_der_Schweiz#Todesf%C3%A4lle)
in Switzerland. An increase of 200 deaths *per week* would mean that a
large part of the additional mortality is not caused by the virus but by
the “countermeasures”.

Another explanation would be that the approximately 200 test-positive
deaths of the *following week*
([week 13](https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/COVID-19-Pandemie_in_der_Schweiz#Todesf%C3%A4lle))
have already been included. This would mean that all test-positive
deaths are assumed to be *additional* deaths. However, in view of the
age and disease profile as well as [international
experience](https://swprs.org/rki-relativiert-corona-todesfaelle/), this
would be a very doubtful assumption.

In fact, the report adds the following disclaimer: “These initial
estimates are still very uncertain, so that no exact figures can be
published”.

If it turns out that a large proportion of test-positive deaths (median
age: 83 years) are not additional deaths, either the overall mortality
would not be increased, or it would be increased mainly because of the
drastic measures, as [some experts
fear](https://swprs.org/open-letter-from-professor-sucharit-bhakdi-to-german-chancellor-dr-angela-merkel/).

![Weekly mortality until 22 March 2020 (BFS, data status 31 March
2020)](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/bfs-mortaliaet-22-03.png?w=600&h=400)

A Swiss newspaper has presented the current total mortality in
comparison with previous years (see graph below). This illustrates that,
even *if* actually increased, the current mortality rate is still below
the stronger flu winters of recent years.

![Weekly mortality during the year. End date is March 22, not March 31
(TA)](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/mortalitc3a4t-schweiz.png?w=720&h=339)

##### **Further information**

  - Virus test kits destined for Great Britain [had to be
    recalled](https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2020/03/30/uks-attempt-ramp-coronavirus-testing-hindered-key-components/)
    because they already contained corona virus components.
  - The British Imperial College study, which predicted hundreds of
    thousands of additional deaths but was never published in a journal
    or reviewed, [was based on largely unrealistic
    assumptions](https://judithcurry.com/2020/04/01/imperial-college-uk-covid-19-numbers-dont-seem-to-add-up/),
    as has now been shown.
  - The BBC asks, “[Is coronavirus causing the
    deaths?](https://www.bbc.com/news/health-51979654)“, and replies,
    “It could be the major cause, a contributory factor or simply
    present when they are dying of something else.” For example, an
    18-year-old man was reported as the “youngest Corona victim” after a
    positive test the day before his death. However, the hospital later
    reported that the young man had died of a serious pre-existing
    condition.
  - The European health authority ECDC has published [very strict
    guidelines](https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/sites/default/files/documents/COVID-19-safe-handling-of-bodies-or-persons-dying-from-COVID19.pdf)
    for handling test-positive or “presumed test-positive” corpses. In
    view of the very low mortality rates to date, such guidelines appear
    questionable from a medical point of view; however, they
    significantly increase the burden on the health and funeral
    services, and at the same time have a high media impact.
  - A German state media outlet has published a [critical
    commentary](https://www.br.de/nachrichten/wissen/bhakdis-brief-an-die-kanzlerin-was-ist-dran-an-seinen-fragen,RutYDhd)
    on Professor Sucharit Bhakdi’s Open Letter to Chancellor Merkel.
  - The ARTE documentary “[Profiteers of
    Fear](https://vimeo.com/403175258)” from 2009 shows how the mainly
    privately financed WHO “upgraded” a mild wave of influenza (the
    so-called “swine flu”) to a global pandemic so that vaccines worth
    several billion dollars could be sold to governments around the
    world. Some of the protagonists of that time are again [prominently
    represented](https://www.nature.com/articles/news.2009.424) in the
    current situation.
  - The former judge at the British Supreme Court, Jonathan Sumption,
    declared [in a BBC
    interview](https://www.spectator.co.uk/article/former-supreme-court-justice-this-is-what-a-police-state-is-like-)
    on the British measures: “This is what a police state is like”.

#### April 2, 2020 (II)

  - Already in 2018, the Guardian wrote that “[Pollution and flu bring
    steep rise in lung-related
    illnesses](https://www.theguardian.com/society/2018/dec/09/steep-rise-lung-related-illness-hospitals-nhs)“:
    Shortage of specialists adds to worries that surge in respiratory
    diseases is putting pressure on A\&Es.
  - Professor Martin Haditsch, specialist in microbiology, virology and
    infection epidemiology, [sharply criticises the Covid19
    measures](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PtzHH8DhgZM). These are
    “completely unfounded” and would “trample on sound judgment and
    ethical principles”.
  - Even representatives of German nursing homes are now
    [complaining](https://pflege-prisma.de/2020/03/31/sterbezahlen-in-pflegeheimen/)
    about the restrictive measures and inappropriate media coverage of
    Covid19: “<span class="tlid-translation translation" lang="en">Even
    before the coronavirus in the winter months, it often happened that
    many guests died in a relatively short time, but the television crew
    did not stand behind the door and did not show people in protective
    suits heroically exposing themselves to the risk of infection.”  
    </span>
  - Figures from the northern Italian city of Treviso (near Venice) show
    that, despite 108 test-positive deaths by the end of March, overall
    mortality in municipal hospitals[remained roughly the
    same](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/reppublica-treviso.jpg)
    as in previous years. This is a further indication that the
    temporarily increased mortality in some places is more likely to be
    due to external factors such as panic and collapse than due to the
    coronavirus alone.
  - Professor John Oxford of Queen Mary University London, one of the
    world’s leading virologists and influenza specialists, comes to the
    following [conclusion regarding
    Covid19](https://novuscomms.com/2020/03/31/a-view-from-the-hvivo-open-orphan-orph-laboratory-professor-john-oxford/):
    “Personally, I would say the best advice is to spend less time
    watching TV news which is sensational and not very good. Personally,
    I view this Covid outbreak as akin to a bad winter influenza
    epidemic. In this case we have had 8000 deaths this last year in the
    ‘at risk’ groups viz over 65% people with heart disease etc. I do
    not feel this current Covid will exceed this number. We are
    suffering from a media epidemic\!”

#### April 1, 2020

##### **On the situation in Italy**

Italian doctors reported that they had [already
observed](https://www.scmp.com/news/china/society/article/3076334/coronavirus-strange-pneumonia-seen-lombardy-november-leading)
severe cases of pneumonia in northern Italy at the end of last year.
However, genetic analyses now show that the Covid19 virus only appeared
in Italy in January of this year. “The severe pneumonia diagnosed in
Italy in November and December must therefore be due to a different
pathogen,”[a virologist
noted](https://www.nzz.ch/wissenschaft/coronavirus-der-stammbaum-verraet-woher-es-kommt-ld.1548271).
This once again raises the question what role the Covid19 virus, or
other factors, actually play in the Italian situation.

On March 30, we mentioned the list of Italian doctors who died “during
the Corona crisis”, many of whom were up to 90 years old and didn’t
actively participate in the crisis at all. Today, all years of birth on
the list [have been
removed](https://portale.fnomceo.it/elenco-dei-medici-caduti-nel-corso-dellepidemia-di-covid-19/)
(see however the last [archive
version](https://web.archive.org/web/20200328152430/https://portale.fnomceo.it/elenco-dei-medici-caduti-nel-corso-dellepidemia-di-covid-19/)).
A strange procedure.

We have also received the following message from an observer in Italy,
who gives further details about the dramatic situation there, which is
obviously due to far more than a virus:

“In recent weeks, most of the Eastern European nurses who worked 24
hours a day, 7 days a week supporting people in need of care in Italy
have left the country in a hurry. This is not least because of the
panic-mongering and the curfews and border closures threatened by the
“emergency governments”. As a result, old people in need of care and
disabled people, some without relatives, were left helpless by their
carers.

Many of these abandoned people then ended up after a few days in the
hospitals, which had been permanently overloaded for years, because they
were dehydrated, among other things. Unfortunately, the hospitals lacked
the personnel who had to look after the children locked up in their
apartments because schools and kindergartens had been closed. This then
led to the complete collapse of the care for the disabled and the
elderly, especially in those areas where even harder “measures” were
ordered, and to chaotic conditions.

The nursing emergency, which was caused by the panic, temporarily led to
many deaths among those in need of care and increasingly among younger
patients in the hospitals. These fatalities then served to cause even
more panic among those in charge and the media, who reported, for
example, “another 475 fatalities”, “The dead are being removed from
hospitals by the army”, accompanied by pictures of coffins and army
trucks lined up.

However, this was the result of the funeral directors’ fear of the
“killer virus”, who therefore refused their services. Moreover, on the
one hand there were too many deaths at once and on the other hand the
government passed a law that the corpses carrying the coronavirus had to
be cremated. In Catholic Italy, few cremations had been carried out in
the past. Therefore there were only a few small crematoria, which very
quickly reached their limits. Therefore the deceased had to be laid out
in different churches.

In principle, this development is the same in all countries. However,
the quality of the health system has a considerable influence on the
effects. Therefore, there are fewer problems in Germany, Austria or
Switzerland than in Italy, Spain or the USA. However, as can be seen in
the official figures, there is no significant increase in the mortality
rate. Just a small mountain that came from this tragedy.”

![Italy test-positive deaths by prior illnesses (ISS /
Bloomberg)](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/03/covid-iss-stat-bloomberg.png?w=550&h=301)

##### **Hospital situation in the US, Germany and Switzerland**

  - The US television station CBS [was
    caught](https://nypost.com/2020/04/01/cbs-admits-to-using-footage-from-italy-in-report-about-nyc/)
    using footage from an Italian intensive care unit in a piece on the
    current situation in New York.
  - Contrary to media reports, the register of German intensive care
    units also [shows no increased
    occupancy](https://www.divi.de/register/intensivregister). An
    employee of a Munich clinic explained that they had been “waiting
    for weeks for the wave to hit”, but that there was “no increase in
    patient numbers”. He said that the politicians’ statements did not
    correspond with their own experience, and that the “myth of the
    killer virus” could “not be confirmed”.
  - Also in Swiss clinics, no increased occupancy has been observed so
    far. A visitor to the cantonal hospital in Lucerne reports that
    there is “less activity than in normal times”. Entire floors have
    been closed for Covid19, but staff “are still waiting for patients”.
    The hospitals in Bern, Basel, Zug and Zurich have also been
    “emptied”. Even in Ticino, the intensive care units are [not
    working to
    capacity](https://www.nzz.ch/schweiz/tessin-verlegt-erste-corona-patienten-in-deutschschweizer-spitaeler-ld.1549417),
    but patients are now being transferred to other parts of the
    country. From a purely medical point of view, this makes little
    sense.

##### **Other medical notes  
**

  - The director of the University Medical Center Hamburg, Dr. Ansgar
    Lohse, [demands a quick end to curfews and contact
    bans](https://www.mopo.de/hamburg/uke-infektiologe-fordert-es-muessen-sich-mehr-menschen-mit-corona-infizieren-36483636).
    He argues that *more people should be infected with corona*. Kitas
    and schools should be reopened as soon as possible so that children
    and their parents can become immune through infection with the
    corona virus. The continuation of the strict measures would lead to
    an economic crisis, which would also cost lives, said the physician.
  - In Spain, [15% of test-positives are doctors and
    nurses](https://www.heise.de/tp/features/Das-ist-keine-Krise-sondern-eine-Katastrophe-4694104.html).
    Although many of them show no symptoms, they have to go into
    quarantine, causing the Spanish healthcare system to collapse.
  - Dr. John Lee, professor emeritus of pathology, [is writing
    about](https://www.spectator.co.uk/article/how-to-understand-and-report-figures-for-covid-19-deaths-)
    the highly misleading definition and communication of “corona
    deaths” in the British *Spectator*.
  - The [latest data from
    Norway](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/die-lage-in-norwegen.pdf),
    evaluated by a PhD in environmental toxicology, again show that the
    rate of test-positives does not increase – as would be expected in
    the case of an epidemic – but fluctuates in the normal range for
    coronaviruses between 2 and 10%. The average age of the
    test-positive deceased is 84 years, the causes of death are not
    publicly reported, and there is no excess mortality.
  - Sweden, which has so far managed without radical measures and has
    not reported increased mortality (similar to Asian countries such as
    Japan or South Korea), is remarkably [put under
    pressure](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/mar/30/catastrophe-sweden-coronavirus-stoicism-lockdown-europe)
    from the international media to change its strategy.
  - Data from New York State show that the hospitalization rate of
    test-positive individuals could be[more than twenty times
    lower](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/27/nyregion/new-rochelle-coronavirus.html)
    than originally assumed.
  - An [article on the specialist portal
    DocCheck](https://www.doccheck.com/de/detail/articles/26271-covid-19-beatmung-und-dann)
    deals with the problem of ventilating test-positive patients. In
    test-positive patients, simple ventilation through a mask is
    officially advised against, among other things to prevent the
    coronavirus from spreading through aerosols. Therefore, test
    positive intensive care patients are often intubated directly.
    However, intubation has poor chances of success and often leads to
    additional damage to the lungs (so-called ventilator-induced lung
    damage). As with medication, the question arises as to whether a
    more gentle treatment of patients would not be medically more
    sensible.

##### **Reports on political developments**

  - A German state minister[has called on the
    population](https://de.nachrichten.yahoo.com/strobl-b%C3%BCrger-verst%C3%B6%C3%9Fe-gegen-corona-regeln-polizei-melden-095746341.html)
    to “be vigilant and report violations of the rules for containing
    the corona epidemic to the police”. “[Eagerly
    reported](https://www.br.de/nachrichten/bayern/buerger-melden-eifrig-verstoesse-gegen-corona-regeln,RuGXp1h)”
    are, for example, “prohibited group formation, children in
    playgrounds, parties” and hikers.
  - German constitutional law experts are [raising the
    alarm](https://www.focus.de/politik/deutschland/corona-regelungen-der-regierung-medizin-darf-nicht-gefaehrlicher-sein-als-die-krankheit_id_11827625.html)
    for “serious encroachments on fundamental rights”. Constitutional
    law expert Hans Michael Heinig warns that the “democratic
    constitutional state could turn into a fascist-hysterical hygiene
    state in no time”. Professor Christoph Möllers of Berlin’s Humboldt
    University explains that the infection protection law “cannot serve
    as a basis for such far-reaching restrictions of citizens’ rights of
    freedom”. According to the former president of the German Federal
    Constitutional Court, Hans Jürgen Papier, “emergency measures do not
    justify the suspension of civil liberties in favour of an
    authoritarian and surveillance state”.
  - Online petitions have been launched in several countries to end
    curfews and other encroachments on basic rights. At the same time,
    critical video contributions, even by doctors, are increasingly
    being deleted. In Berlin, a registered event on fundamental rights,
    at which the German constitution was distributed, [was terminated by
    the
    police](https://kenfm.de/berliner-corona-demo-strafbar-aufgeloest-aber-froehlich/).

#### March 31, 2020 (I)

Dr. Richard Capek and other researchers [have already
shown](https://coronadaten.wordpress.com/) that the number of
test-positive individuals in relation to the number of tests performed
*remains constant* in all countries studied so far, which speaks
*against* an exponential spread of the virus and merely indicates an
exponential increase in the number of tests.

Depending on the country, the proportion of test-positive individuals is
between 5 and 15%, which corresponds to the usual spread of corona
viruses. Interestingly, these constant numerical values are not actively
communicated ([or even
removed](https://multipolar-magazin.de/artikel/coronavirus-irrefuhrung-fallzahlen))
by authorities and the media. Instead, exponential but irrelevant and
misleading curves are shown without context.

Such behavior, of course, does not correspond to professional medical
standards, as a look at the traditional [influenza
report](https://influenza.rki.de/Saisonberichte/2017.pdf) of the German
Robert Koch Institute makes clear (p. 30, see chart below). Here, in
addition to the number of detections (right), the number of samples
(left, grey bars) and the positive rate (left, blue curve) are shown.

This immediately shows that during a flu season the positive rate rises
from 0 to 10% to up to 80% of the samples and drops back to the normal
value after a few weeks. In comparison, Covid19 tests show a constant
positive rate in the normal range (see below).

![Left: Number of samples and positive rate; right: number of detections
(RKI,
2017)](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/03/rki-influenza-report-2017.png?w=650&h=530)

Constant Covid19-positive rate using US data (Dr. Richard Capek). This
applies analogously to all other countries for which data on the number
of samples is currently available.

![Covid19 positive rate (Dr. Richard Capek, US
data)](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/03/infizierte-pro-test2603.jpg?w=600&h=325)

#### March 31, 2020 (II)

  - A [graphical analysis of the European monitoring
    data](https://off-guardian.org/2020/03/30/covid19-yet-to-impact-europes-overall-mortality/)
    impressively shows that, irrespective of the measures taken, overall
    mortality throughout Europe remained in the normal range or below by
    March 25, and often significantly below the levels of previous
    years. Only in Italy (65+) was the overall mortality rate somewhat
    increased (probably for several reasons), but it was still below
    previous flu seasons.
  - The president of the German Robert Koch Institute confirmed again
    that pre-existing conditions and actual cause of death [*do not play
    a role*](https://swprs.org/rki-relativiert-corona-todesfaelle/) in
    the definition of so-called “corona deaths”. From a medical point of
    view, such a definition is clearly misleading. It has the obvious
    and generally known effect of putting politics and society in fear.
  - In Italy the situation is now [beginning to calm
    down](https://www.tagesspiegel.de/politik/die-verlangsamung-ist-da-in-italien-zeichnet-sich-die-wende-in-der-coronakrise-ab/25698124.html).
    As far as is known, the temporarily increased mortality rates (65+)
    were rather local effects, often accompanied by mass panic and a
    breakdown in health care. A politician from northern Italy asks, for
    example, “how is it possible that Covid patients from Brescia are
    transported to Germany, while in the nearby Verona two thirds of
    intensive care beds are empty?”
  - In an article published in the *European Journal of Clinical
    Investigation*, Stanford professor of medicine John Ioannidis
    [criticizes](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/eci.13222)
    the “harms of exaggerated information and non-evidence-based
    measures”. Even journals had published dubious claims at the
    beginning.
  - A Chinese study published in the *Chinese Journal of Epidemiology*
    in early March, which indicated the unreliability of the Covid19
    virus tests (approx. 50% false-positive results in asymptomatic
    patients), has since been withdrawn. The lead author of the study,
    the dean of a medical school, did not want to give the reason for
    the withdrawal and spoke of a “[sensitive
    matter](https://www.npr.org/sections/health-shots/2020/03/26/822084429/in-defense-of-coronavirus-testing-strategy-administration-cited-retracted-study)“,
    which could indicate political pressure, as an NPR journalist noted.
    Independent of this study, however, the unreliability of so-called
    PCR virus tests has long been known: In 2003, for example, a mass
    infection in a Canadian nursing home with SARS corona viruses was
    “found”, which later [turned out to
    be](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2095096/) common
    cold corona viruses (which can also be fatal for risk groups).
  - Authors of the *German Risk Management Network RiskNET* [speak in a
    Covid19
    analysis](https://www.risknet.de/themen/risknews/covid-19-und-der-blindflug/)
    of a “blind flight” as well as “insufficient data competence and
    data ethics”. Instead of more and more tests and measures a
    *representative sample* is necessary. The “sense and ratio” of the
    measures must be critically questioned.
  - The Spanish interview with the internationally renowned
    Argentinian-French virologist Pablo Goldschmidt [was translated into
    German](https://www.rubikon.news/artikel/der-corona-totalitarismus).
    Goldschmidt considers the measures imposed to be medically
    counterproductive and notes that one must now “read Hannah Arendt”
    to understand the “origins of totalitarianism”.
  - Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orban, like other prime ministers
    and presidents before him, has [largely
    disempowered](https://www.krone.at/2127086) the Hungarian parliament
    under an “emergency law” and can now govern essentially by decree.

#### March 30, 2020 (I)

  - In Germany, some clinics can no longer accept patients – not because
    there are too many patients or too few beds, but [because the
    nursing staff have tested
    positive](https://web.archive.org/web/20200330082928/https://www.sueddeutsche.de/panorama/coronavirus-news-deutschland-wolfsburg-laschet-1.4828033),
    although in most cases they hardly show any symptoms. This case
    illustrates again how and why health care systems are getting
    paralysed.
  - In a German retirement and nursing home for people with advanced
    dementia, 15 test-positive people [have
    died](https://web.archive.org/web/20200330082928/https://www.sueddeutsche.de/panorama/coronavirus-news-deutschland-wolfsburg-laschet-1.4828033).
    However, “surprisingly many people have died **without showing
    symptoms of corona**.” A German medical specialist informs us: “From
    my medical point of view, there is some evidence that some of these
    people may have died as a result of the measures taken. People with
    dementia get into high stress when major changes are made to their
    everyday lives: isolation, no physical contact, possibly hooded
    staff.” Nevertheless, the deceased are counted as “corona deaths” in
    German and international statistics. In connection with the “corona
    crisis”, it is now also possible to die of an illness without even
    having its symptoms.
  - According to a Swiss pharmacologist, the Swiss Inselspital in Bern
    has forced staff to take leave, stopped therapies and postponed
    operations due to the fear of Covid19.
  - Professor Gérard Krause, head of the Department of Epidemiology at
    the German Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, warns on German
    public television ZDF that the anti-corona measures “[could lead to
    more deaths than the virus
    itself](https://www.zdf.de/nachrichten/politik/coronavirus-epidemiologe-folgen-helmholtz-100.html)“.
  - Various media reported that more than 50 doctors in Italy have
    already died “during the corona crisis”, like soldiers in a battle.
    A glance at the [corresponding
    list](https://web.archive.org/web/20200328152430/https://portale.fnomceo.it/elenco-dei-medici-caduti-nel-corso-dellepidemia-di-covid-19/),
    however, shows that most of the deceased are retired doctors of
    various kinds, including 90-year-old psychiatrists and
    pediatricians, many of whom may have died of natural causes.
  - An [extensive survey in
    Iceland](https://www.buzzfeed.com/albertonardelli/coronavirus-testing-iceland)
    found that 50% of all test-positive persons showed “no symptoms” at
    all, while the other 50% mostly showed “very moderate cold-like
    symptoms”. According to the Icelandic data, the mortality rate of
    Covid19 is in the *per mille* range, i.e. in the flu range or below.
    Of the two test-positive
    [deaths](https://www.government.is/news/article/?newsid=c65cf658-6eb6-11ea-9462-005056bc4d74),
    one was “a tourist with unusual symptoms”. ([More Icelandic
    data](https://www.covid.is/data))
  - The British journalist Peter Hitchens
    [writes](https://hitchensblog.mailonsunday.co.uk/2020/03/theres-powerful-evidence-this-great-panic-is-foolish-yet-our-freedom-is-still-broken-and-our-economy.html),
    “There’s powerful evidence this great panic is foolish. Yet our
    freedom is still broken and our economy crippled.” Hitchens points
    out that in parts of the UK, police drones [monitor and
    report](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fHNxDzLsPeg) “non-essential”
    walks in nature. In some cases, police drones are [calling on people
    via loudspeaker](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D4GEZjUTkqc) to go
    home in order to “save lives”. (Note: Not even George Orwell had
    thought that far ahead.)
  - The Italian secret service [warns
    of](https://www.focus.de/panorama/welt/sorge-vor-sozialen-unruhen-supermaerkte-gepluendert-apotheken-ueberfallen-italiens-geheimdienst-warnt-vor-aufstaenden_id_11826664.html)
    social unrest and uprisings. Supermarkets are already being looted
    and pharmacies raided.
  - Professor Sucharit Bhakdi has meanwhile [published a
    video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LsExPrHCHbw&feature=emb_title)
    (German/English) in which he explains his [Open
    Letter](https://swprs.org/open-letter-from-professor-sucharit-bhakdi-to-german-chancellor-dr-angela-merkel/)
    to German Chancellor Dr. Angela Merkel.

#### March 30, 2020 (II)

In several countries, there is increasing evidence in relation to
Covid19 that “the treatment could be worse than the disease”.

On the one hand, there is the risk of so-called [nosocomial
infections](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hospital-acquired_infection),
i.e. infections that the patient, who may only be mildly ill, acquires
in hospital. It is estimated that there are approximately 2.5 million
nosocomial infections and 50,000 deaths per year in Europe. Even in
German intensive care units, about 15% of patients acquire a nosocomial
infection, including pneumonia on artificial respiration. There is also
the problem of increasingly antibiotic-resistant germs in hospitals.

Another aspect is the certainly well-intentioned but sometimes very
aggressive treatment methods that are increasingly used in Covid19
patients. These include, in particular, the administration of steroids,
antibiotics and anti-viral drugs (or a combination thereof). Already in
the treatment of SARS-1 patients, it has been shown that the outcome
*with* such treatment was [often worse and more
fatal](https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2020/02/200206110703.htm)
than without such treatment.

#### March 29, 2020

  - Dr Sucharit Bhakdi, Professor Emeritus of Medical Microbiology in
    Mainz, Germany, wrote an [Open Letter to German Chancellor Dr Angela
    Merkel](https://swprs.org/open-letter-from-professor-sucharit-bhakdi-to-german-chancellor-dr-angela-merkel/),
    calling for an urgent reassessment of the response to Covid19 and
    asking the Chancellor five crucial questions.
  - The[latest data from the German Robert Koch
    Institute](https://multipolar-magazin.de/artikel/coronavirus-irrefuhrung-fallzahlen)
    show that the increase in test-positive persons is proportional to
    the increase in the number of tests, **i.e. in percentage terms it
    remains roughly the same.** This may indicate that the increase in
    the number of cases is mainly due to an increase in the number of
    tests, and not due to an ongoing epidemic.
  - The Milan microbiologist Maria Rita Gismondo [calls on the Italian
    government](https://www.secoloditalia.it/2020/03/coronavirus-la-gismondo-ammonisce-duramente-basta-snocciolare-numeri-sui-positivi-sono-dati-falsati/)
    to stop communicating the daily number of “corona positives” as
    these figures are “fake” and put the population in unnecessary
    panic. The number of test-positives depends very much on the type
    and number of tests and says nothing about the state of health.
  - Dr. John Ioannidis, Stanford Professor of Medicine and Epidemiology,
    gave an in-depth [one-hour
    interview](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d6MZy-2fcBw) on the lack
    of data for Covid19 measures.
  - The Argentinean virologist Pablo Goldschmidt, who lives in France,
    considers the political reaction to Covid19 as “completely
    exaggerated” and warns against [“totalitarian
    measures”](https://www.infobae.com/coronavirus/2020/03/28/para-un-prestigioso-cientifico-argentino-el-coronavirus-no-merece-que-el-planeta-este-en-un-estado-de-parate-total/).
    In parts of France, the movement of people is already monitored by
    drones.
  - Italian author Fulvio Grimaldi, born in 1934, explains that the
    state measures currently implemented in Italy are [“worse than under
    fascism”](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O3BuNp01vpc). Parliament
    and society have been completely disempowered.

#### March 28, 2020

  - A [new study by the University of
    Oxford](https://news.yahoo.com/oxford-study-suggests-millions-people-221100162.html)
    concludes that Covid19 may already have existed in the UK since
    January 2020 and that half of the population may already be
    immunised, with most people experiencing no or only mild symptoms.
    This would mean that *only one in a thousand people* would need to
    be hospitalised for Covid19.
    ([Study](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.03.24.20042291v1))
  - British media [reported
    on](https://www.bbc.com/news/uk-england-beds-bucks-herts-52041709) a
    21 year old woman “who died of Covid19 without any previous
    illnesses”. However, it has since[become
    known](https://archive.is/20200329015127/https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/mar/27/chloe-middleton-death-21-year-old-not-recorded-nhs-covid-19-related)
    that the woman did not test positive for Covid19 and died of a heart
    failure. The Covid19 rumor had arisen “because she had a slight
    cough”.
  - The German media scientist Professor Otfried Jarren criticized that
    many media [provide uncritical
    journalism](https://www.deutschlandfunk.de/covid-19-scharfe-kritik-an-ard-und-zdf-wegen.2849.de.html?drn:news_id=1117133)
    that emphasizes threats and executive power. According to Professor
    Jarren, there is hardly any differentiation and real debate between
    experts.

#### March 27, 2020 (I)

**Italy**: According to the [latest
data](http://www.salute.gov.it/portale/caldo/SISMG_sintesi_ULTIMO.pdf)
published by the Italian Ministry of Health, overall mortality is now
significantly higher in all age groups over 65 years of age, after
having been below average due to the mild winter. Until March 14,
overall mortality was still below the flu season of 2016/2017, but may
have already exceeded it in the meantime. Most of this excess mortality
currently comes from northern Italy. However, the exact role of Covid19,
compared to other factors such as panic, healthcare collapse and the
lockdown itself, is not yet clear.

![Italy: Total mortality 65+ years (red line) (MdS / 14 March
2020)](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/03/italia-mortalita-marzo-14.png?w=600&h=343)

**France**: According to [the latest data from
France](https://www.santepubliquefrance.fr/maladies-et-traumatismes/maladies-et-infections-respiratoires/infection-a-coronavirus/documents/bulletin-national/covid-19-point-epidemiologique-du-24-mars-2020),
overall mortality at the national level remains within the normal range
after a mild influenza season. However, in some regions, particularly in
the north-east of France, overall mortality in the over-65 age group has
already risen sharply in connection with Covid19 (see figure below).

![France: Total mortality at national level (above) and in the severely
affected Haut-Rhin department (SPF / 15 March
2020)](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/03/france-mortality.png?w=650&h=400)

France also provides [detailed
information](https://www.santepubliquefrance.fr/maladies-et-traumatismes/maladies-et-infections-respiratoires/infection-a-coronavirus/documents/bulletin-national/covid-19-point-epidemiologique-du-24-mars-2020)
on the age distribution and pre-existing conditions of test-positive
intensive care patients and deceased patients (see figure below):

  - The average age of the **deceased** is 81.2 years.
  - 78% of the deceased were over 75 years old; 93% were over 65 years
    old.
  - 2.4% of the deceased were under 65 years of age and had no (known)
    previous illness
  - The average age of **intensive care patients** is 65 years.
  - 26% of intensive care patients are over 75 years old; 67% have
    previous illnesses.
  - 17% of intensive care patients are under 65 years of age and have no
    previous illnesses.

The French authorities add that “the share of the (Covid-19) epidemic in
overall mortality remains to be determined.”

![Age distribution of hospitalized patients (top left), intensive care
patients (top right), patients at home (bottom left), and the deceased
(bottom right). Source: SPF / 24 March
2020](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/03/france-age-distribution-march-24.png?w=736)

**USA**: A Canadian researcher has evaluated the official data on
[deaths from
pneumonia](https://gis.cdc.gov/grasp/fluview/mortality.html) in the US.
There are usually between 3000 and 5500 deaths *per week* and thus
significantly more than the current figures for Covid19. The *total
number* of deaths in the US is between 50,000 and 60,000 per week.
(Note: In the graph below, the latest figures for March 2020 have not
yet been fully updated, so the curve is slumping).

![USA: Deaths from pneumonia per week
(CDC/McIntyre)](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/03/us-pneumonia-deaths.png?w=400&h=360)

**Great Britain:**

  - Neil Ferguson of Imperial College London [now
    assumes](https://www.newscientist.com/article/2238578-uk-has-enough-intensive-care-units-for-coronavirus-expert-predicts/)
    that the UK has sufficient capacity in intensive care units to treat
    Covid19 patients.
  - John Lee, Professor Emeritus of Pathology, [argues
    that](https://www.spectator.co.uk/article/The-evidence-on-Covid-19-is-not-as-clear-as-we-think)
    the particular way in which Covid-19 cases are registered leads to
    an overestimation of the risk posed by Covid19 compared to normal
    flu and cold cases.

**Other topics:  
**

  - A [preliminary
    study](https://medium.com/@nigam/higher-co-infection-rates-in-covid19-b24965088333)
    by researchers at Stanford University showed that 20 to 25% of
    Covid19-positive patients tested additionally positive for other
    influenza or cold viruses.
  - The number of applications for unemployment insurance in the US
    skyrocketed to a record of [over three
    million](https://www.businessinsider.com/us-weekly-jobless-claims-record-coronavirus-unemployment-insurance-labor-recession-2020-3).
    In this context, a sharp [increase in
    suicides](https://twitter.com/KoenSwinkels/status/1243066532390977544)
    is also expected.
  - The first test-positive patient in Germany has now recovered.
    According to his own statement, the 33-year-old man had experienced
    the illness [“not as bad as the
    flu”.](https://www.br.de/nachrichten/bayern/coronavirus-patient-nummer-1-wie-ich-die-quarantaene-erlebte,Rrm4Ul8)
  - Spanish media
    [report](https://elpais.com/sociedad/2020-03-25/los-test-rapidos-de-coronavirus-comprados-en-china-no-funcionan.html)
    that the antibody rapid tests for Covid19 only have a sensitivity of
    30%, although it should be at least 80%.
  - A [study from China
    in 2003](https://ehjournal.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1476-069X-2-15)
    concluded that the probability of dying from SARS is 84% higher in
    people exposed to moderate air pollution than in patients from
    regions with clean air. The risk is even 200% higher among people
    from areas with heavily polluted air.
  - The German Network for Evidence-Based Medicine (EbM) [criticises the
    media
    reporting](https://www.ebm-netzwerk.de/en/publications/covid-19) on
    Covid19: “The media coverage does not in any way take into account
    the criteria of evidence-based risk communication that we have
    demanded. () The presentation of raw data without reference to other
    causes of death leads to an overestimation of the risk”.

#### March 27, 2020 (II)

  - German researcher Dr. Richard Capek [argues in a quantitative
    analysis](https://coronadaten.wordpress.com/) that the “Corona
    epidemic” is in fact an “epidemic of tests”. Capek shows that while
    the number of tests has increased exponentially, the proportion of
    infections has remained stable and mortality has decreased, which
    speaks *against* an exponential spread of the virus itself (see
    below).
  - German Virology professor Dr. Carsten Scheller from the University
    of Würzburg [explains in a
    podcast](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=w-uub0urNfw) that Covid19
    is definitely comparable with influenza and has so far even led to
    fewer deaths. Professor Scheller suspects that the exponential
    curves often presented in the media have more to do with the
    *increasing number of tests* than with an unusual spread of the
    virus itself. For countries like Germany, Italy is less of a role
    model than Japan and South Korea. Despite millions of Chinese
    tourists and only minimal social restrictions, these countries have
    not yet experienced a Covid19 crisis. One reason for this could be
    the wearing of mouth masks: This would hardly protect against
    infection, but would limit the spread of the virus by infected
    people.
  - The[latest figures from Bergamo
    (city)](https://www.ecodibergamo.it/stories/bergamo-citta/a-bergamo-decessi-4-volte-oltre-la-medialeco-lancia-unindagine-nei-comuni_1346651_11/)
    show that total mortality in March 2020 increased from typically 150
    people per month to around 450 people. It is still unclear what
    proportion of this was due to Covid19 and what proportion was due to
    other factors such as mass panic, systemic collapse and the lockdown
    itself. Apparently the city hospital was overrun by people from the
    whole region and collapsed.
  - The two Stanford professors of medicine, Dr. Eran Bendavid and Dr.
    Jay Bhattacharya, explain [in an
    article](https://web.archive.org/web/20200325103650/https://www.wsj.com/articles/is-the-coronavirus-as-deadly-as-they-say-11585088464)
    that the lethality of Covid19 is overestimated *by several orders of
    magnitude* and is probably even in Italy only at 0.01% to 0.06% and
    thus below that of influenza. The reason for this overestimation is
    the greatly underestimated number of people already infected
    (without symptoms). As an example, the fully tested Italian
    community of Vo is mentioned, which showed [50 to 75% symptom-free
    test-positive](https://www.repubblica.it/salute/medicina-e-ricerca/2020/03/16/news/coronavirus_studio_il_50-75_dei_casi_a_vo_sono_asintomatici_e_molto_contagiosi-251474302/)
    persons.
  - Dr. Gerald Gaß, President of the German Hospital Association,
    explained in an [interview with the
    Handelsblatt](https://www.handelsblatt.com/politik/deutschland/coronakrise-deutsche-krankenhausgesellschaft-wir-sind-besser-vorbereitet-als-italien/25651268.html)
    that “the extreme situation in Italy is mainly due to the very low
    intensive care capacities”.
  - Dr. Wolfgang Wodarg, one of the [early and vocal
    critics](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=p_AyuhbnPOI) of a “Covid19
    panic”, was [provisionally
    excluded](https://www.transparency.de/aktuelles/detail/article/in-eigener-sache-vorstand-beschliesst-ruhen-der-mitgliedschaft-von-wolfgang-wodarg-1/)
    by the board of *Transparency International Germany*, where he
    headed the health working group. Wodarg had already been severely
    attacked by the media for his criticism.
  - NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden [warns
    that](https://www.cnet.com/news/snowden-warns-government-surveillance-amid-covid-19-could-be-long-lasting/)
    governments are using the current situation to expand the
    surveillance state and restrict fundamental rights. The control
    measures currently put in place would not be dismantled after the
    crisis.

<div class="tiled-gallery type-rectangular tiled-gallery-unresized" data-original-width="736" data-carousel-extra="{&quot;blog_id&quot;:132938956,&quot;permalink&quot;:&quot;https:\/\/swprs.org\/facts-about-covid19-march-2020-archive\/&quot;,&quot;likes_blog_id&quot;:132938956}" itemscope="" itemtype="http://schema.org/ImageGallery">

<div class="gallery-row" style="width: 736px; height: 206px;" data-original-width="736" data-original-height="206">

<div class="gallery-group images-1" style="width: 360px; height: 206px;" data-original-width="360" data-original-height="206">

<div class="tiled-gallery-item tiled-gallery-item-large" itemprop="associatedMedia" itemscope="" itemtype="http://schema.org/ImageObject">

[](https://swprs.org/a-swiss-doctor-on-covid-19/anzahl-infizierte-und-tests-2603/)

![Number of tests and test-positives
(proportional)](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/03/anzahl-infizierte-und-tests-2603.jpg?w=356&h=202)

<div class="tiled-gallery-caption" itemprop="caption description">

Number of tests and test-positives
(proportional)

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="gallery-group images-1" style="width: 376px; height: 206px;" data-original-width="376" data-original-height="206">

<div class="tiled-gallery-item tiled-gallery-item-large" itemprop="associatedMedia" itemscope="" itemtype="http://schema.org/ImageObject">

[](https://swprs.org/covid-19-hinweis-ii/infizierte-pro-test2603/)

![Test-positives per number of tests
(constant)](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/03/infizierte-pro-test2603.jpg?w=372&h=202)

<div class="tiled-gallery-caption" itemprop="caption description">

Test-positives per number of tests (constant)

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

The increasing number of tests is finding a *proportional* number of
infections, the ratio stays *constant*, speaking *against* an ongoing
viral epidemic (Dr. Richard Capek, US data)

#### March 26, 2020 (I)

  - **USA**: The [latest US data](https://healthweather.us/) of March 25
    shows a decreasing number of flu-like illnesses throughout the
    country, the frequency of which is now well below the multi-year
    average. The government measures can be ruled out as a reason for
    this, as they have been in effect for less than a
week.

<div class="tiled-gallery type-rectangular tiled-gallery-unresized" data-original-width="736" data-carousel-extra="{&quot;blog_id&quot;:132938956,&quot;permalink&quot;:&quot;https:\/\/swprs.org\/facts-about-covid19-march-2020-archive\/&quot;,&quot;likes_blog_id&quot;:132938956}" itemscope="" itemtype="http://schema.org/ImageGallery">

<div class="gallery-row" style="width: 736px; height: 246px;" data-original-width="736" data-original-height="246">

<div class="gallery-group images-1" style="width: 408px; height: 246px;" data-original-width="408" data-original-height="246">

<div class="tiled-gallery-item tiled-gallery-item-large" itemprop="associatedMedia" itemscope="" itemtype="http://schema.org/ImageObject">

[](https://swprs.org/covid-19-hinweis-ii/us-influenza-trend/)

![US Influenza Trend (March 25,
2020)](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/03/us-influenza-trend.png?w=404&h=242)

<div class="tiled-gallery-caption" itemprop="caption description">

US Influenza Trend (March 25,
2020)

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="gallery-group images-1" style="width: 328px; height: 246px;" data-original-width="328" data-original-height="246">

<div class="tiled-gallery-item tiled-gallery-item-large" itemprop="associatedMedia" itemscope="" itemtype="http://schema.org/ImageObject">

[](https://swprs.org/covid-19-hinweis-ii/us-illness-levels/)

![US Influenza Trend (March 25,
2020)](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/03/us-illness-levels.png?w=324&h=242)

<div class="tiled-gallery-caption" itemprop="caption description">

US Influenza Trend (March 25, 2020)

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

USA: Decreasing flu-like illnesses (March 25, 2020, KINSA)

  - **Germany**: The [latest influenza
    report](https://influenza.rki.de/Wochenberichte/2019_2020/2020-12.pdf)
    of the German Robert Koch Institute of March 24 documents a
    “nationwide decrease in activity of acute respiratory diseases”:
    The number of influenza-like illnesses and the number of hospital
    stays caused by them is below the level of previous years and is
    currently continuing to decline. The RKI continues: “The increase in
    the number of visits to the doctor cannot currently be explained
    either by influenza viruses circulating in the population or by
    SARS-CoV-2.”

<div class="tiled-gallery type-rectangular tiled-gallery-unresized" data-original-width="736" data-carousel-extra="{&quot;blog_id&quot;:132938956,&quot;permalink&quot;:&quot;https:\/\/swprs.org\/facts-about-covid19-march-2020-archive\/&quot;,&quot;likes_blog_id&quot;:132938956}" itemscope="" itemtype="http://schema.org/ImageGallery">

<div class="gallery-row" style="width: 736px; height: 206px;" data-original-width="736" data-original-height="206">

<div class="gallery-group images-1" style="width: 331px; height: 206px;" data-original-width="331" data-original-height="206">

<div class="tiled-gallery-item tiled-gallery-item-large" itemprop="associatedMedia" itemscope="" itemtype="http://schema.org/ImageObject">

[](https://swprs.org/covid-19-hinweis-ii/rki-atemwegserkrankungen-20-2-2020/)

![Deutschland: Atemwegserkrankungen 2019/2020 ggü.
Vorjahren](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/03/rki-atemwegserkrankungen-20-2-2020.png?w=327&h=202)

<div class="tiled-gallery-caption" itemprop="caption description">

Deutschland: Atemwegserkrankungen 2019/2020 ggü.
Vorjahren

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="gallery-group images-1" style="width: 405px; height: 206px;" data-original-width="405" data-original-height="206">

<div class="tiled-gallery-item tiled-gallery-item-large" itemprop="associatedMedia" itemscope="" itemtype="http://schema.org/ImageObject">

[](https://swprs.org/covid-19-hinweis-ii/rki-kliniken-belegung/)

![Deutschland: Krankenhausaufenthalte durch Atemwegserkrankungen nach
Altersgruppen](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/03/rki-kliniken-belegung.png?w=401&h=202)

<div class="tiled-gallery-caption" itemprop="caption description">

Deutschland: Krankenhausaufenthalte durch Atemwegserkrankungen nach
Altersgruppen

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

Germany: Decreasing flu-like illnesses (20 March 2020, RKI)

  - **Italy**: The renowned Italian virologist Giulio Tarro
    [argues](https://www.cybermednews.eu/index.php/it/health/70871-interview-to-the-virologist-giulio-tarro-the-death-rate-of-covid-19-is-less-than-1-as-confirmed-by-the-national-institute-of-allergy-and-infectious-diseases)
    that the mortality rate of Covid19 is below 1% even in Italy and is
    therefore comparable to influenza. The higher values only arise
    because no distinction is made between deaths with and by Covid19
    and because the number of (symptom-free) infected persons is greatly
    underestimated.
  - **UK**: The authors of the British Imperial College study, who
    predicted up to 500,000 deaths, are again reducing their forecasts.
    After already [admitting](https://www.bbc.com/news/health-51979654)
    that a large proportion of test-positive deaths are part of normal
    mortality, they now state that the peak of the disease [may be
    reached in two to three
    weeks](https://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/nhs-now-likely-to-cope-with-coronavirus-says-key-scientist-rn5m6nggk)
    already.
  - **UK**: The British Guardian [reported in
    February 2019](https://www.theguardian.com/society/2019/feb/20/britons-urged-to-get-flu-vaccine-as-critical-cases-rise-above-2000)
    that even in the generally weak flu season 2018/2019 there were more
    than 2180 flu-related admissions to intensive care units in the UK.
  - **Switzerland**: In Switzerland, the excess mortality due to Covid19
    is apparently still zero. The latest “fatal victim” presented by the
    media is a [100-year-old
    woman](https://www.nau.ch/ort/basel/drei-weitere-covid-19-todesfalle-in-basel-stadt-65684099).
    Nevertheless, the Swiss government continues to tighten restrictive
    measures.

#### March 26, 2020 (II)

  - **Sweden**: Sweden has so far pursued the most liberal strategy in
    dealing with Covid19, which is [based on two
    principles](https://www.zeit.de/politik/ausland/2020-03/coronavirus-schweden-stockholm-oeffentliches-leben/komplettansicht):
    Risk groups are protected and people with flu symptoms stay at home.
    “If you follow these two rules, there is no need for further
    measures, the effect of which is only marginal anyway,” said chief
    epidemiologist Anders Tegnell. Social and economic life will
    continue normally. The big rush to hospitals has so far failed to
    materialize, Tegnell said.
  - German criminal and constitutional law expert Dr. Jessica Hamed
    [argues
    that](https://www.fr.de/politik/coronakrise-deutschland-sind-kontaktsperren-ausgangsbeschraenkungen-rechtswidrig-13611821.html)
    measures such as general curfews and contact bans are a massive and
    disproportionate encroachment on fundamental rights of freedom and
    are therefore presumably “all illegal”.
  - The [latest European monitoring
    report](https://www.euromomo.eu/index.html) on overall mortality
    continues to show normal or below-average values in all countries
    and all age groups, but now with [one
    exception](https://www.euromomo.eu/outputs/zscore_country65.html):
    in the 65+ age group in Italy a currently increased overall
    mortality is predicted (so-called delay-adjusted z-score), which is,
    however, still below the values of the influenza waves of 2017 and
    2018.

#### March 25, 2020

  - German immunologist and toxicologist, Professor Stefan Hockertz,
    explains in a [radio
    interview](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7wfb-B0BWmo) that Covid19
    is no more dangerous than influenza (the flu), but that it is simply
    observed much more closely. More dangerous than the virus is the
    fear and panic created by the media and the “authoritarian reaction”
    of many governments. Professor Hockertz also notes that most
    so-called “corona deaths” have in fact died of other causes while
    also testing positive for coronaviruses. Hockertz believes that up
    to ten times more people than reported already had Covid19 but
    noticed nothing or very little.
  - The Argentinean virologist and biochemist Pablo Goldschmidt explains
    that Covid19 is [no more dangerous than a bad cold or the
    flu](https://www.clarin.com/buena-vida/coronavirus-panico-injustificado-dice-virologo-argentino-francia_0_yVcmJ4RM.html).
    It is even possible that the Covid19 virus circulated *already in
    earlier years*, but wasn’t discovered because no one was looking for
    it. Dr. Goldschmidt speaks of a “global terror” created by the media
    and politics. Every year, he says, three million newborns worldwide
    and 50,000 adults in the US alone die of pneumonia.
  - Professor Martin Exner, head of the Institute for Hygiene at the
    University of Bonn, [explains in an
    interview](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9mI9trSm3PY) why health
    personnel are currently under pressure, even though there has hardly
    been any increase in the number of patients in Germany so far: On
    the one hand, doctors and nurses who have tested positive have to be
    quarantined and are often hard to replace. On the other hand, nurses
    from neighbouring countries, who provide an important part of the
    care, are currently unable to enter the country due to closed
    borders.
  - Professor Julian Nida-Ruemelin, former German Minister of State for
    Culture and Professor of Ethics, [points
    out](https://www.zdf.de/nachrichten/zdf-morgenmagazin/julian-nida-ruemelin-zur-corona-krise-100.html)
    that Covid19 poses no risk to the healthy general population and
    that extreme measures such as curfews are therefore not justified.
  - Using data from the cruise ship Diamond Princess, Stanford Professor
    John Ioannidis
    [showed](https://www.statnews.com/2020/03/17/a-fiasco-in-the-making-as-the-coronavirus-pandemic-takes-hold-we-are-making-decisions-without-reliable-data/)
    that the age-corrected lethality of Covid19 is between 0.025% and
    0.625%, i.e. in the range of a strong cold or the flu. Moreover, a
    [Japanese
    study](https://www.niid.go.jp/niid/en/2019-ncov-e/9407-covid-dp-fe-01.html)
    showed that of all the test-positive passengers, and despite the
    high average age, 48% remained *completely symptom-free; e*ven among
    the 80-89 year olds 48% remained symptom-free, while among the 70 to
    79 year olds it was an astounding 60% that developed no symptoms at
    all. This again raises the question whether the *pre-existing
    diseases* are not perhaps a more important factor than the virus
    itself. The Italian example has shown that [99% of test-positive
    deaths](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-03-18/99-of-those-who-died-from-virus-had-other-illness-italy-says)
    had one or more pre-existing conditions, and even among these, only
    [12% of the death
    certificates](https://web.archive.org/web/20200324214448/https://www.telegraph.co.uk/global-health/science-and-disease/have-many-coronavirus-patients-died-italy/)
    mentioned Covid19 as a causal factor.

#### March 24, 2020

  - The UK has removed Covid19 from the official list of High Consquence
    Infectious Diseases (HCID), stating that mortality rates are [“low
    overall”](https://www.gov.uk/guidance/high-consequence-infectious-diseases-hcid#status-of-covid-19).
  - The director of the German National Health Institute (RKI)
    [admitted](https://swprs.org/rki-relativiert-corona-todesfaelle/)
    that they count all test-positive deaths, *irrespective of the
    actual cause of death*, as “coronavirus deaths”. The average age of
    the deceased is 82 years, most with serious preconditions. As in
    most other countries, excess mortality due Covid19 is likely to be
    near zero in Germany.
  - Beds in Swiss intensive care units reserved for Covid19 patients are
    still [“mostly
    empty”](https://www.aargauerzeitung.ch/aargau/kanton-aargau/erst-3-von-100-aargauer-betten-der-intensivstationen-sind-belegt-so-ruesten-sich-die-spitaeler-auf-die-epidemie-137332716).
  - German Professor Karin Moelling, former Chair of Medical Virology at
    the University of Zurich, stated in an
    [interview](https://www.radioeins.de/programm/sendungen/die_profis/archivierte_sendungen/beitraege/corona-virus-kein-killervirus.html)
    that Covid19 is “no killer virus” and that “panic must end”.

#### March 23, 2020 (I)

  - A new French study in the Journal of Antimicrobial Agents, titled
    [SARS-CoV-2: fear versus
    data](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0924857920300972),
    concludes that “the problem of SARS-CoV-2 is probably
    overestimated”, since “the mortality rate for SARS-CoV-2 is not
    significantly different from that for common coronaviruses
    identified at the study hospital in France”.
  - An [Italian study of
    August 2019](https://www.ijidonline.com/article/S1201-9712\(19\)30328-5/fulltext)
    found that flu deaths in Italy were between 7,000 and 25,000 in
    recent years. This value is higher than in most other European
    countries due to the large elderly population in Italy, and much
    higher than anything attributed to Covid-19 so far.
  - In a [new fact
    sheet](https://www.who.int/news-room/q-a-detail/q-a-similarities-and-differences-covid-19-and-influenza),
    the World Health Organization WHO reports that Covid-19 is in fact
    spreading *slower, not faster,* than influenza by a factor of about
    50%. Moreover, pre-symptomatic transmission appears to be much lower
    with Covid-19 than with influenza.
  - A leading Italian doctor reports that [“strange cases of
    pneumonia”](https://www.scmp.com/news/china/society/article/3076334/coronavirus-strange-pneumonia-seen-lombardy-november-leading)
    were seen in the Lombardy region *already in November 2019*, raising
    again the question if they were caused by the new virus (which
    officially only appeared in Italy in February 2020), or by other
    factors, such as the [dangerously high smog
    levels](https://www.thelocal.it/20170131/our-lungs-are-breaking-smog-levels-way-above-safe-limits-in-northern-italy)
    in Northern Italy.
  - Danish researcher Peter Gøtzsche, founder of the renowned Cochrane
    Medical Collaboration, writes that Corona is “[an epidemic of mass
    panic](https://www.deadlymedicines.dk/corona-an-epidemic-of-mass-panic/)”
    and “logic was one of the first victims.”

#### March 23, 2020 (II)

  - Former Israeli Health Minister, Professor Yoram Lass, [says
    that](https://en.globes.co.il/en/article-lockdown-lunacy-1001322696)
    the new coronavirus is “less dangerous than the flu” and lockdown
    measures “will kill more people than the virus”. He adds that “the
    numbers do not match the panic” and “psychology is prevailing over
    science”. He also notes that “Italy is known for its enormous
    morbidity in respiratory problems, more than three times any other
    European country.”
  - Pietro Vernazza, a Swiss infectious disease specialist, argues that
    many of the imposed measures[are not based on
    science](https://www.tagblatt.ch/leben/ostschweizer-infektiologe-pietro-vernazza-die-zahlen-zu-den-jungen-corona-virus-erkrankten-sind-irrefuehrend-ld.1206440)
    and should be reversed. According to Vernazza, mass testing makes no
    sense because 90% of the population will see no symptoms, and
    lockdowns and closing schools are even “counterproductive”. He
    recommends protecting only risk groups while keeping the economy and
    society at large undisturbed.
  - The President of the World Doctors Federation, Frank Ulrich
    Montgomery, [argues
    that](https://www.general-anzeiger-bonn.de/news/politik/deutschland/interview-mit-weltaerztepraesident-montgomery-ueber-corona-pandemie-ist-chaos_aid-49609561)
    lockdown measures as in Italy are “unreasonable” and
    “counterproductive” and should be reversed.
  - In Switzerland, despite media panic, excess mortality is still at or
    near zero: the latest test-positive
    [“victims”](https://www.bluewin.ch/de/newsregional/zuerich/1068-bestatigte-corona-falle-und-funf-todesfalle-im-kanton-zurich-371873.html)
    were a 96-year-old in palliative care and a 97-year-old with
    pre-existing conditions.
  - The latest statistical report of the Italian National Health
    Institute is now [available in
    English](https://www.epicentro.iss.it/coronavirus/bollettino/Report-COVID-2019_20_marzo_eng.pdf).

#### March 22, 2020 (I)

**Regarding the situation in Italy**: Most major media falsely report
that Italy has up to 800 deaths per day *from the coronavirus*. In
reality, the president of the Italian Civil Protection Service stresses
that these are deaths “*with* the coronavirus and *not from* the
coronavirus” (minute 03:30 of the [press
conference](https://youtu.be/0M4kbPDHGR0?t=210)). In other words, these
persons died while also testing positive.

As Professors Ioannidis and Bhakdi [have
shown](https://www.statnews.com/2020/03/17/a-fiasco-in-the-making-as-the-coronavirus-pandemic-takes-hold-we-are-making-decisions-without-reliable-data/),
countries like South Korea and Japan that introduced *no lockdown
measures* have experienced near-zero excess mortality in connection with
Covid-19, while the Diamond Princess cruise ship experienced an
extra­polated mortality figure in the *per mille range*, i.e. at or
below the level of the seasonal flu.

Current test-positive death figures in Italy are still less than 50% of
normal daily overall mortality in Italy, which is around 1800 deaths per
day. Thus it is possible, perhaps even likely, that a large part of
*normal* daily mortality now simply counts as “Covid19” deaths (as they
test positive). This is the point stressed by the President of the
Italian Civil Protection Service.

However, by now it is clear that certain regions in Northern Italy, i.e.
those facing the toughest [lockdown
measures](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2020_Italy_coronavirus_lockdown),
are experiencing markedly increased daily mortality figures. It is also
known that in the Lombardy region, 90% of test-positive deaths occur
*not* in intensive care units, but instead mostly [at
home](https://www.tgcom24.mediaset.it/cronaca/coronavirus-in-lombardia-9-morti-su-10-mai-giunti-in-terapia-intensiva_16362350-202002a.shtml).
And more than 99% have serious pre-existing health conditions.

Professor Sucharit Bhakdi [has
called](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JBB9bA-gXL4) lockdown measures
“useless”, “self-destructive” and a “collective suicide”. Thus the
extremely troubling question arises as to what extent the increased
mortality of these elderly, isolated, highly stressed people with
multiple pre-existing health conditions may in fact be caused by the
weeks-long lockdown measures still in force.

If so, it may be one of those cases where the treatment is worse than
the disease. (See update below: only 12% of death certificates show the
coronavirus as a cause.)

![Angelo Borrelli, head of the Italian Civil Protection Service,
emphasizing the difference between deaths *with* and *from*
coronaviruses.](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/03/borrelli2.jpg?w=550&h=309)

#### March 22, 2020 (II)

  - In Switzerland, there are currently 56 test-positive deaths, all of
    whom were [“high risk
    patients”](https://www.nzz.ch/schweiz/coronavirus-in-der-schweiz-die-neusten-entwicklungen-ld.1542664#subtitle-wie-viele-infizierte-und-todesf-lle-gibt-es-second)
    due to their advanced age and/or pre-existing health conditions.
    Their actual cause of death, i.e. from or simply with the virus, has
    not been communicated.
  - The Swiss government claimed that the situation in southern
    Switzerland (next to Italy) is “dramatic”, yet local doctors [denied
    this](https://www.nzz.ch/schweiz/punkto-intensivbetten-sind-wir-im-tessin-besser-ausgeruestet-als-der-rest-der-schweiz-ld.1547728)
    and said everything is normal.
  - According to [press
    reports](https://www.blick.ch/news/schweiz/nicht-nur-beatmungsgeraete-werden-knapp-im-kampf-gegen-corona-es-droht-ein-engpass-beim-sauerstoff-id15808185.html),
    oxygen bottles may become scarce. The reason, however, is not a
    currently higher usage, but rather hoarding due to fear of future
    shortages.
  - In many countries, there is already an [increasing
    shortage](https://www.washingtonpost.com/health/covid-19-hits-doctors-nurses-emts-threatening-health-system/2020/03/17/f21147e8-67aa-11ea-b313-df458622c2cc_story.html)
    of doctors and nurses. This is primarily because healthcare workers
    testing positive have to self-quarantine, even though in many cases
    they will remain fully or largely symptom-free.

#### March 22, 2020 (III)

  - A model from Imperial College London predicted between 250,000 and
    500,000 deaths in the UK “from” Covid-19, but the authors of the
    study [have now conceded](https://www.bbc.com/news/health-51979654)
    that many of these deaths would not be in addition to, but rather
    part of the normal annual mortality rate, which in the UK is about
    600,000 people per year. In other words, excess mortality would
    remain low.
  - Dr. David Katz, founding director of the Yale University Prevention
    Research Center, asks in the [New York
    Times](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/20/opinion/coronavirus-pandemic-social-distancing.html):
    “Is Our Fight Against Coronavirus Worse Than the Disease? There may
    be more targeted ways to beat the pandemic.”
  - According to [Italian Professor Walter
    Ricciardi](https://web.archive.org/web/20200324214448/https://www.telegraph.co.uk/global-health/science-and-disease/have-many-coronavirus-patients-died-italy/),
    **“only 12% of death certificates have shown a direct causality from
    coronavirus”**, whereas in public reports “all the people who die in
    hospitals with the coronavirus are deemed to be dying of the
    coronavirus”. This means that Italian death figures reported by the
    media have to be reduced by *at least a factor of 8* to obtain
    actual deaths *caused by* the virus. Thus one ends up with at most a
    few dozen deaths per day, compared to an overall daily mortality of
    1800 deaths and up to 20,000 flu deaths per year.

#### March 21, 2020 (I)

  - Spain reports only three test-positive deaths [under the age
    of 65](https://www.20minutos.es/noticia/4193883/0/media-edad-coronavirus-espana/)
    (out of a total of about 1000). Their pre-existing health conditions
    and actual cause of death are not yet known.
  - On March 20, Italy
    [reported](https://www.msn.com/en-au/news/coronavirus/italy-coronavirus-deaths-surge-by-627-in-a-day-lifting-total-death-toll-to-4032/ar-BB11tDnS)
    627 nationwide test-positive deaths in one day. By comparison,
    normal overall mortality in Italy is about 1800 deaths per day.
    Since February 21, Italy has reported about 4000 test-positive
    deaths. Normal overall mortality during this time frame is up to
    50,000 deaths. It is not yet known to what extent normal overall
    mortality has increased, or to what extent it has simply turned
    test-positive. Moreover, Italy and Europe have had a very mild flu
    season in 2019/2020 that has spared many otherwise vulnerable
    people.
  - According to [Italian news
    reports](https://www.tgcom24.mediaset.it/cronaca/coronavirus-in-lombardia-9-morti-su-10-mai-giunti-in-terapia-intensiva_16362350-202002a.shtml),
    90% of test-positive deceased in the Lombardy region have died
    *outside of* intensive care units, mostly at home or in general care
    sections. Their cause of death and the possible role of quarantine
    measures in their deaths remain unclear. Only 260 out of 2168
    test-positive persons have died in ICUs.
  - Bloomberg highlights that [“99% of Those Who Died From Virus Had
    Other Illness, Italy
    Says”](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-03-18/99-of-those-who-died-from-virus-had-other-illness-italy-says)

![Italy test-positive deaths by prior illnesses (ISS /
Bloomberg)](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/03/covid-iss-stat-bloomberg.png?w=550&h=301)

#### March 21, 2020 (II)

  - The Japan Times asks: [Japan was expecting a coronavirus explosion.
    Where is
    it?](https://www.japantimes.co.jp/news/2020/03/20/national/coronavirus-explosion-expected-japan/)
    Despite being one of the first countries getting positive test
    results and having imposed no lockdown, Japan is one of the
    least-affected nations. Quote: “Even if Japan may not be counting
    all those infected, hospitals aren’t being stretched thin and there
    has been no spike in pneumonia cases.”
  - Italian researchers argue that the extreme smog in Northern Italy,
    the worst in Europe, [may be playing a causative
    role](https://www.heise.de/tp/features/Feinstaubpartikel-als-Viren-Vehikel-4687454.html)
    in the current pneumonia outbreak there, as in Wuhan before.
  - In a [new interview](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JBB9bA-gXL4),
    Professor Sucharit Bhakdi, a world renowned expert in medical
    microbiology, says blaming the new coronavirus alone for deaths is
    “wrong” and “dangerously misleading”, as there are other more
    important factors at play, notably pre-existing health conditions
    and poor air quality in Chinese and Northern Italian cities.
    Professor Bhakdi describes the currently discussed or imposed
    measures as “grotesque”, “useless”, “self-destructive” and a
    “collective suicide” that will shorten the lifespan of the elderly
    and should not be accepted by society.

#### March 20, 2020

  - According to the [latest European monitoring
    report](https://www.euromomo.eu/index.html), overall mortality in
    all countries (including Italy) and in all age groups remains within
    or even below the normal range so far.
  - According to the [latest German
    statistics](https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/COVID-19-Pandemie_in_Deutschland#Todesf%C3%A4lle_in_den_Medien),
    the median age of test-positive deaths is about 83 years, most with
    pre-existing health conditions that might be a possible cause of
    death.
  - A [2006 Canadian
    study](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2095096/)
    referred to by Stanford Professor John Ioannidis found that common
    cold coronaviruses may also cause death rates of up to 6% in risk
    groups such as residents of a care facility, and that virus test
    kits initially falsely indicated an infection with SARS
    coronaviruses.

#### March 19, 2020 (I)

The Italian National Health Institute ISS has published [a new
report](https://www.epicentro.iss.it/coronavirus/bollettino/Report-COVID-2019_17_marzo-v2.pdf)
on test-positive deaths:

  - The median age is 80.5 years (79.5 for men, 83.7 for women).
  - 10% of the deceased was over 90 years old; 90% of the deceased was
    over 70 years old.
  - At most 0.8% of the deceased had no pre-existing chronic illnesses.
  - Approximately 75% of the deceased had two or more pre-existing
    conditions, 50% had three more pre-existing conditions, in
    particular heart disease, diabetes and cancer.
  - Five of the deceased were between 31 and 39 years old, all of them
    with serious pre-existing health conditions (e.g. cancer or heart
    disease).
  - The National Health Institute hasn’t yet determined what the
    patients examined ultimately died of and refers to them in general
    terms as *Covid19-positive deaths*.

#### March 19, 2020 (II)

  - A
    [report](https://milano.corriere.it/notizie/cronaca/18_gennaio_10/milano-terapie-intensive-collasso-l-influenza-gia-48-malati-gravi-molte-operazioni-rinviate-c9dc43a6-f5d1-11e7-9b06-fe054c3be5b2.shtml)
    in the Italian newspaper *Corriere della Sera* points out that
    Italian intensive care units already collapsed under the marked flu
    wave in 2017/2018. They had to postpone operations, call nurses back
    from holiday and ran out of blood donations.
  - German virologist Hendrik Streeck
    [argues](https://www.faz.net/aktuell/gesellschaft/gesundheit/coronavirus/virologe-hendrik-streeck-ueber-corona-neue-symptome-entdeckt-16681450.html?printPagedArticle=true#pageIndex_2)
    that Covid19 is unlikely to increase total mortality in Germany,
    which normally is around 2500 people *per day*. Streeck mentions the
    case of a 78-year-old man with preconditions who died of heart
    failure, subsequently tested positive for Covid19 and thus was
    included in the statistics of Covid19 deaths.
  - According to Stanford Professor John Ioannidis, the new coronavirus
    may be [no more
    dangerous](https://www.statnews.com/2020/03/17/a-fiasco-in-the-making-as-the-coronavirus-pandemic-takes-hold-we-are-making-decisions-without-reliable-data/)
    than some of the common coronaviruses, even in older people.
    Ioannidis argues that there is no reliable medical data backing the
    measures currently decided upon.

#### March 18, 2020

  - A [new epidemiological
    study](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.02.12.20022434v2)
    (preprint) concludes that the fatality of Covid19 even in the
    Chinese city of Wuhan was only 0.04% to 0.12% and thus *rather
    lower* than that of seasonal flu, which has a mortality rate of
    about 0.1%. As a reason for the overestimated fatality of Covid19,
    the researchers suspect that initially only a small number of cases
    were recorded in Wuhan, as the disease was probably asymptomatic or
    mild in many people.
  - Chinese researchers argue that [extreme winter
    smog](https://www.eurasiareview.com/01022020-polluted-air-could-be-an-important-cause-of-wuhan-pneumonia-oped/)
    in the city of Wuhan may have played a causal role in the outbreak
    of pneumonia. In the summer of 2019, [public
    protests](https://www.cnn.com/2019/07/10/asia/china-wuhan-pollution-problems-intl-hnk/index.html)
    were already taking place in Wuhan because of the poor air quality.
  - New satellite images show how Northern Italy has the [highest levels
    of air
    pollution](https://twitter.com/esa/status/1238480433047916545) in
    Europe, and how this air pollution has been greatly reduced by the
    quarantine.
  - A manufacturer of the Covid19 test kit states that it should [only
    be used for research
    purposes](https://www.creative-diagnostics.com/sars-cov-2-coronavirus-multiplex-rt-qpcr-kit-277854-457.htm)
    and not for diagnostic applications, as it has not yet been
    clinically validated.

![Datasheet of Covid19 virus test
kit](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/03/covid-testkit.png?w=550&h=149)

#### March 17, 2020 (I)**  
**

  - The mortality profile remains puzzling from a virological point of
    view because, in contrast to influenza viruses, children are spared
    and men are affected about twice as often as women. On the other
    hand, this profile corresponds to [natural
    mortality](http://www.gbe-bund.de/gbe10/abrechnung.prc_abr_test_logon?p_uid=gast&p_aid=0&p_knoten=FID&p_sprache=D&p_suchstring=820),
    which is close to zero for children and almost twice as high for
    75-year-old men as for women of the same age.
  - The younger test-positive deceased almost always had severe
    pre-existing conditions. For example, a 21-year-old Spanish soccer
    coach had died test-positive, making international headlines.
    However, the doctors
    [diagnosed](https://sports.yahoo.com/spanish-football-coach-francisco-garcia-163153573.html)
    an unrecognized leukemia, whose typical complications include severe
    pneumonia.
  - The decisive factor in assessing the danger of the disease is
    therefore *not* the number of test-positive persons and deceased,
    which is often mentioned in the media, but the number of people
    actually and unexpectedly developing or dying *from pneumonia*
    (so-called excess mortality). So far, this value remains very low in
    most countries.
  - In Switzerland, some emergency units are already overloaded simply
    because of the large number of people [who want to be
    tested](https://insideparadeplatz.ch/2020/03/16/notfall-stationen-bereits-seit-tagen-am-anschlag/).
    This points to an additional psychological and logistical component
    of the current situation.

#### March 17, 2020 (II)

  - Italian immunology professor Sergio Romagnani from the University of
    Florence comes to the conclusion in a study on 3000 people that 50
    to 75% of the test-positive people of all ages remain [completely
    symptom-free](https://www.repubblica.it/salute/medicina-e-ricerca/2020/03/16/news/coronavirus_studio_il_50-75_dei_casi_a_vo_sono_asintomatici_e_molto_contagiosi-251474302/)
    – significantly more than previously assumed.
  - The occupancy rate of the North Italian ICUs in the winter months is
    typically already [85
    to 90%](https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/2763188).
    Some or many of these existing patients could also be test-positive
    by now. However, the number of additional unexpected pneumonia cases
    is not yet known.
  - A hospital doctor in the Spanish city of Malaga [writes on
    Twitter](https://twitter.com/NeurologaenSAS/status/1239498772570308609)
    that people are currently more likely to die from panic and systemic
    collapse than from the virus. The hospital is being overrun by
    people with colds, flu and possibly Covid19 and doctors have lost
    control.

#### March 14, 2020

According to the [latest
data](https://www.epicentro.iss.it/coronavirus/sars-cov-2-decessi-italia)
of the Italian National Health Institute ISS, the average age of the
positively-tested deceased in Italy is currently about 81 years. 10% of
the deceased are over 90 years old. 90% of the deceased are over 70
years old.

80% of the deceased had suffered from two or more chronic diseases. 50%
of the deceased had suffered from three or more chronic diseases. The
chronic diseases include in particular cardiovascular problems,
diabetes, respiratory problems and cancer.

Less than 1% of the deceased were healthy persons, i.e. persons without
pre-existing chronic diseases. Only about 30% of the deceased are women.

The Italian Institute of Health moreover
[distinguishes](https://youtu.be/0M4kbPDHGR0?t=210) between those who
died *from* the coronavirus and those who died *with* the coronavirus.
In many cases it is not yet clear whether the persons died from the
virus or from their pre-existing chronic diseases or from a combination
of both.

The two Italians deceased under 40 years of age (both 39 years old) were
a cancer patient and a diabetes patient with additional complications.
In these cases, too, the exact cause of death was not yet clear (i.e. if
from the virus or from their pre-existing diseases).

The partial overloading of the hospitals is due to the general rush of
patients and the increased number of patients requiring special or
intensive care. In particular, the aim is to stabilize respiratory
function and, in severe cases, to provide anti-viral therapies.

(**Update**: The Italian National Institute of Health published a
[statistical
report](https://www.epicentro.iss.it/coronavirus/bollettino/Report-COVID-2019_17_marzo-v2.pdf)
on test-positive patients and deceased, confirming the above data.)

**The following aspects should also be taken into account:**

Northern Italy has one of the oldest populations and the [worst air
quality](https://twitter.com/esa/status/1238480433047916545) in Europe,
which had already led to an [increased
number](https://www.thelocal.it/20170131/our-lungs-are-breaking-smog-levels-way-above-safe-limits-in-northern-italy)
of respiratory diseases and deaths in the past and is likely an
additional risk factor in the current epidemic.

South Korea, for instance, has experienced a much milder course than
Italy and has already passed the peak of the epidemic. In South Korea,
only about 70 deaths with a positive test result have been reported so
far. As in Italy, those affected were mostly high-risk patients.

The few dozen test-positive Swiss deaths so far were also high-risk
patients with chronic diseases, an average age of more than 80 years and
a maximum age of 97 years, whose exact cause of death, i.e. from the
virus or from their pre-existing diseases, is not yet known.

Furthermore, studies have shown that the internationally used virus test
kits[may give a false positive
result](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2095096/) in some
cases. In these cases, the persons may *not* have contracted the new
coronavirus, but presumably one of the many existing human coronaviruses
that are part of the annual (and currently ongoing) common cold and flu
epidemics.

Thus the most important indicator for judging the danger of the disease
is *not* the frequently reported number of positively-tested persons and
deaths, but the number of persons actually and unexpectedly developing
or dying *from pneumonia (*so-called excess mortality).

According to all current data, for the healthy general population of
school and working age, a mild to moderate course of the Covid-19
disease can be expected. Senior citizens and persons with existing
chronic diseases should be protected. The medical capacities should be
optimally
prepared.

#### [Main article: Facts about Covid19](https://swprs.org/a-swiss-doctor-on-covid-19/)

-----

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div id="footer" class="footer bg-graphite">

<div class="section-inner row clear" data-role="complementary">

<div class="column column-1 one-third medium-padding">

<div class="widgets">

<div id="nav_menu-3" class="widget widget_nav_menu">

<div class="widget-content clear">

### Swiss Policy Research

<div class="menu-allgemein-container">

  - <span id="menu-item-251">[Kontakt](https://swprs.org/kontakt/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-33090">[Übersicht](https://swprs.org/uebersicht/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-33286">[Donationen](https://swprs.org/donationen/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-15372">[Disclaimer](https://swprs.org/disclaimer/)</span>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="column column-2 one-third medium-padding">

<div class="widgets">

<div id="nav_menu-4" class="widget widget_nav_menu">

<div class="widget-content clear">

### English

<div class="menu-english-container">

  - <span id="menu-item-20017">[About Us /
    Contact](https://swprs.org/contact/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-20015">[The Media
    Navigator](https://swprs.org/media-navigator/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-20016">[The CFR and the
    Media](https://swprs.org/the-american-empire-and-its-media/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-33285">[Donations](https://swprs.org/donations/)</span>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="column column-3 one-third medium-padding">

<div class="widgets">

<div id="blog_subscription-4" class="widget widget_blog_subscription jetpack_subscription_widget">

<div class="widget-content clear">

### Follow by email

Follow

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="credits section bg-dark small-padding">

<div class="credits-inner section-inner clear">

[WordPress.com](https://wordpress.com/?ref=footer_custom_com).

[Up ↑](# "To the top")

</div>

</div>

<div style="display:none">

</div>

<div id="carousel-reblog-box">

Post to

<div class="submit">

<span class="canceltext">[Cancel](#)</span>

</div>

<div class="arrow">

</div>

</div>

![](https://pixel.wp.com/b.gif?v=noscript)
