[Skip to
content](#content)

[](https://swprs.org/)

<div class="cover">

</div>

[Search](#search-container)

<div id="search-container" class="header-search-block bg-graphite hidden">

<span class="screen-reader-text">Search for:</span>

</div>

<div class="header-inner section-inner">

[![Swiss Policy Research
Logo](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/05/swiss-policy-research-logo-300.png)](https://swprs.org/)

[Swiss Policy Research](https://swprs.org/)

Geopolitics and
    Media

</div>

<div class="navigation section no-padding bg-dark">

Menu

<div class="main-navigation">

  - <span id="menu-item-4374">[Start](https://swprs.org)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-5941">[Studien](https://swprs.org/srf-propaganda-analyse/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-4361">[SRF /
        ZDF](https://swprs.org/srf-propaganda-analyse/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-4359">[NZZ-Studie](https://swprs.org/die-nzz-studie/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-4373">[Agenturen](https://swprs.org/der-propaganda-multiplikator/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-7978">[Medienmatrix](https://swprs.org/die-propaganda-matrix/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-9423">[Analysen](https://swprs.org/medien-navigator/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-9414">[Navigator](https://swprs.org/medien-navigator/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-8524">[Techniken](https://swprs.org/der-propaganda-schluessel/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-10908">[Wikipedia](https://swprs.org/propaganda-in-der-wikipedia/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-9920">[Kriege](https://swprs.org/logik-imperialer-kriege/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-4362">[Netzwerke](https://swprs.org/netzwerk-medien-schweiz/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-6283">[Schweiz](https://swprs.org/netzwerk-medien-schweiz/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-7215">[Deutschland](https://swprs.org/netzwerk-medien-deutschland/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-17401">[Österreich](https://swprs.org/medien-in-oesterreich/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-7216">[USA](https://swprs.org/das-american-empire-und-seine-medien/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-9228">[Fokus
    I](https://swprs.org/bericht-eines-journalisten/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-12119">[Journalistenbericht](https://swprs.org/bericht-eines-journalisten/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-12117">[Russische
        Propaganda](https://swprs.org/russische-propaganda/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-12118">[Die
        »Israel-Lobby«](https://swprs.org/die-israel-lobby-fakten-und-mythen/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-13505">[Pädokriminalität](https://swprs.org/geopolitik-und-paedokriminalitaet/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-17258">[Fokus
    II](https://swprs.org/migration-und-medien/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-32838">[Coronavirus](https://swprs.org/covid-19-hinweis-ii/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-12939">[Integrity
        Initiative](https://swprs.org/die-integrity-initiative/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-17290">[Migration &
        Medien](https://swprs.org/migration-und-medien/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-17291">[Magnitsky
        Act](https://swprs.org/der-fall-magnitsky/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-21964">[Projekt](https://swprs.org/kontakt/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-8525">[Kontakt](https://swprs.org/kontakt/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-10193">[Seitenübersicht](https://swprs.org/uebersicht/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-8637">[Medienspiegel](https://swprs.org/medienspiegel/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-33287">[Donationen](https://swprs.org/donationen/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-14415">[English](https://swprs.org/contact/)</span>

</div>

[Open Search](#)

</div>

<div class="wrapper section medium-padding">

<div class="section-inner clear" data-role="main">

<div id="content" class="content clear center">

# The Editor-in-Chief and the CIA

<div class="post-content clear">

Published: October 2019  
Other languages:
[German](https://swprs.org/der-chefredakteur-und-die-cia/)

The clandestine cooperation between Western intelligence services and
the media has been
[known](http://carlbernstein.com/magazine_cia_and_media.php) for decades
and is well
[documented](https://swprs.org/video-the-cia-and-the-media/). The
following case shows just how closely and comprehensively even leading
European journalists have been cooperating with secret services such as
the CIA.

From 1961 to 1989, former Austrian journalist [Otto
Schulmeister](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Otto_Schulmeister) was
editor-in-chief and publisher of [*Die
Presse*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Die_Presse), one of the most
renowned daily newspapers in Austria. In 2009, his former CIA dossier
was made public — with remarkable details about the decades-long covert
collaboration.

In an exclusive article, Austrian news magazine *Profil*
[revealed](https://www.profil.at/home/ex-presse-chef-dienste-cia-otto-schulmeister-geheimdienst-239634)
the following (translated excerpts):

«The Schulmeister dossier testifies to a problematic, essentially
illegal relationship between a journalist, who believed he was
fulfilling a mission, and the CIA: Schulmeister (code name GRCAMERA)
made editorial statements based on the wishes of the CIA, suppressed
stories if they harmed the US position, urged his editors to contact the
representatives of the US government stationed in Vienna for dinner
meetings and revealed information from background talks with Austrian
politicians and ambassadors of Eastern bloc countries.

The recruitment began with the usual inquiries through third parties and
the search for biographical vulnerabilities that could be used when
needed against the person concerned.

From then on, CIA directives on how to assess this or that political
situation went directly to the chief editor’s office. If there was a
rush and there was no time for a personal meeting, the documents would
be sent to Schulmeister by courier.

On October 29, 1962, the CIA reported: «Material handed out. An
editorial has appeared according to our instructions.»

On December 28, 1962, it said: «The gentlemen’s night has paid off. The
political line of *Die Presse* could hardly be better from our point of
view. () We can place articles anytime. According to instructions from
headquarters, this was requested concerning the Cuba crisis. () I met
GRCAMERA the same day and handed him material that the head office wants
to see published. The story appeared in the Sunday edition in the form
of an editorial signed by him on the front page. () GRCAMERA has
requested support for his son to receive a Quaker Scholarship, () it
does not look like he will be taken, but this is still a useful way to
strengthen the bond.»

On December 17, 1962, the CIA reported that it was worried about a story
that the *Presse* correspondent in Washington wanted to publish
concerning secret US support for the Austrian army. «The story is
correct, () but should not become public at this time, to avoid an
uproar over Austria’s neutrality. () I convinced GRCAMERA that this
would only benefit the Soviets. GRCAMERA agrees not to print the story
() GRCAMERA is pleased to be the first journalist to be received by the
new US Ambassador to Vienna. () It’s a scoop for him.»

On September 19, 1963, the CIA wanted to stop the coverage of an
embarrassing espionage affair in the Interior Ministry: «GRCAMERA ()
promised not to publish anything about this case.»

On April 3, 1964, praise again for the content of the newspaper: «it
leaves nothing to be desired.» Many times Schulmeister was even ahead of
the instructions from headquarters. Only the US correspondent of *Die
Presse* causes minor irritations. «That does not mean Schulmeister is
our agent. () But we can lead him just as if he were our agent ().»

On January 19, 1965, Schulmeister was handed material about the Congo
crisis. «GRCAMERA said he did not need to be convinced of American
interests in the Congo, but () the New York Times recently released a
report on a massacre of rebels there, which was also picked up in
Austria. This puts his newspaper in the uncomfortable situation of
publishing stories that are contrary to the Times version. () GRCAMERA
said we should get the New York Times in line.»

In the course of 1965, the CIA was able to gain another confidential
contact in *Die Presse*, but Schulmeister did not know that, as reported
in the October 12, 1965 report.

In the following years, numerous CIA documents about the war in Vietnam
and other hot spots in US foreign policy went over the desk of the chief
editor in *Die Presse*. Schulmeister often asked for appropriate
analyzes on his own initiative. In 1968, Schulmeister was invited to the
US as part of a Red Carpet Program.

When a policy of détente between the blocks began to emerge in the early
1970s, Schulmeister’s relationship with the CIA began to crumble. ()
Schulmeister apparently behaved like a «fleeing bird». The CIA had
already taken sight of a new, supposedly «less evasive» confidant called
IDENTITY in the files. According to the description – he was a domestic
policy editor, had studied in the US, had a weekend house in Lower
Austria – they had the future chief editor of *Die Presse*, Thomas
Chorherr, in mind.

Thomas Chorherr told *Profil*: «I’ve certainly had a lot to do with
secretaries from the US embassy. But that the CIA was involved, I did
not know. I did not suspect it either, and I have a clear conscience.»
He could not believe that Schulmeister had been in contact with the CIA.
«I should have noticed that,» Chorherr said.

According to the official history on the *Die Presse* homepage,
Schulmeister made the newspaper into a »bastion of independent thinking«
in the 1960s.

The Schulmeister files also contain references to CIA confidants in
other well-known Austrian media, including national broadcaster ORF.
Former ORF director Gerd Bacher said he had never received an offer by
the CIA, but
[added](https://www.diepresse.com/471594/otto-schulmeister-in-den-akten-der-cia):
«If they had asked me, I would have joined in.»

**See also**: [The CIA and the
Media](https://swprs.org/video-the-cia-and-the-media/). A restored 1985
Channel 4 documentary.

-----

Authored by the [Swiss Propaganda Research
Group](https://swprs.org/contact/). Translated by Terje Maloy. The
quotes from the CIA file might have slight variations from the original
text due to being retranslated. This article is Creative Commons 4.0 for
non-commercial purposes.

Original source of published CIA file: Incriminating Otto Schulmeister
of *Die Presse*. The CIA Name File: A Select Edition. In: Journal for
Intelligence, Propaganda and Security Studies 6/1 (2012), 179–207.
([Abstract](http://www.acipss.org/wp-content/uploads/JIPSS_V6N1_extract.pdf))

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div id="footer" class="footer bg-graphite">

<div class="section-inner row clear" data-role="complementary">

<div class="column column-1 one-third medium-padding">

<div class="widgets">

<div id="nav_menu-3" class="widget widget_nav_menu">

<div class="widget-content clear">

### Swiss Policy Research

<div class="menu-allgemein-container">

  - <span id="menu-item-251">[Kontakt](https://swprs.org/kontakt/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-33090">[Übersicht](https://swprs.org/uebersicht/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-33286">[Donationen](https://swprs.org/donationen/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-15372">[Disclaimer](https://swprs.org/disclaimer/)</span>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="column column-2 one-third medium-padding">

<div class="widgets">

<div id="nav_menu-4" class="widget widget_nav_menu">

<div class="widget-content clear">

### English

<div class="menu-english-container">

  - <span id="menu-item-20017">[About Us /
    Contact](https://swprs.org/contact/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-20015">[The Media
    Navigator](https://swprs.org/media-navigator/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-20016">[The CFR and the
    Media](https://swprs.org/the-american-empire-and-its-media/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-33285">[Donations](https://swprs.org/donations/)</span>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="column column-3 one-third medium-padding">

<div class="widgets">

<div id="blog_subscription-4" class="widget widget_blog_subscription jetpack_subscription_widget">

<div class="widget-content clear">

### Follow by email

Follow

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="credits section bg-dark small-padding">

<div class="credits-inner section-inner clear">

[WordPress.com](https://wordpress.com/?ref=footer_custom_com).

[Up ↑](# "To the top")

</div>

</div>

<div style="display:none">

</div>

![](https://pixel.wp.com/b.gif?v=noscript)
