[Skip to
content](#content)

[](https://swprs.org/)

<div class="cover">

</div>

[Search](#search-container)

<div id="search-container" class="header-search-block bg-graphite hidden">

<span class="screen-reader-text">Search for:</span>

</div>

<div class="header-inner section-inner">

[![Swiss Policy Research
Logo](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/05/swiss-policy-research-logo-300.png)](https://swprs.org/)

[Swiss Policy Research](https://swprs.org/)

Geopolitics and
    Media

</div>

<div class="navigation section no-padding bg-dark">

Menu

<div class="main-navigation">

  - <span id="menu-item-4374">[Start](https://swprs.org)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-5941">[Studien](https://swprs.org/srf-propaganda-analyse/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-4361">[SRF /
        ZDF](https://swprs.org/srf-propaganda-analyse/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-4359">[NZZ-Studie](https://swprs.org/die-nzz-studie/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-4373">[Agenturen](https://swprs.org/der-propaganda-multiplikator/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-7978">[Medienmatrix](https://swprs.org/die-propaganda-matrix/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-9423">[Analysen](https://swprs.org/medien-navigator/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-9414">[Navigator](https://swprs.org/medien-navigator/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-8524">[Techniken](https://swprs.org/der-propaganda-schluessel/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-10908">[Wikipedia](https://swprs.org/propaganda-in-der-wikipedia/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-9920">[Kriege](https://swprs.org/logik-imperialer-kriege/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-4362">[Netzwerke](https://swprs.org/netzwerk-medien-schweiz/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-6283">[Schweiz](https://swprs.org/netzwerk-medien-schweiz/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-7215">[Deutschland](https://swprs.org/netzwerk-medien-deutschland/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-17401">[Österreich](https://swprs.org/medien-in-oesterreich/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-7216">[USA](https://swprs.org/das-american-empire-und-seine-medien/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-9228">[Fokus
    I](https://swprs.org/bericht-eines-journalisten/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-12119">[Journalistenbericht](https://swprs.org/bericht-eines-journalisten/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-12117">[Russische
        Propaganda](https://swprs.org/russische-propaganda/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-12118">[Die
        »Israel-Lobby«](https://swprs.org/die-israel-lobby-fakten-und-mythen/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-13505">[Pädokriminalität](https://swprs.org/geopolitik-und-paedokriminalitaet/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-17258">[Fokus
    II](https://swprs.org/migration-und-medien/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-32838">[Coronavirus](https://swprs.org/covid-19-hinweis-ii/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-12939">[Integrity
        Initiative](https://swprs.org/die-integrity-initiative/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-17290">[Migration &
        Medien](https://swprs.org/migration-und-medien/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-17291">[Magnitsky
        Act](https://swprs.org/der-fall-magnitsky/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-21964">[Projekt](https://swprs.org/kontakt/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-8525">[Kontakt](https://swprs.org/kontakt/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-10193">[Seitenübersicht](https://swprs.org/uebersicht/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-8637">[Medienspiegel](https://swprs.org/medienspiegel/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-33287">[Donationen](https://swprs.org/donationen/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-14415">[English](https://swprs.org/contact/)</span>

</div>

[Open
Search](#)

</div>

<div class="wrapper section medium-padding">

<div class="section-inner clear" data-role="main">

<div id="content" class="content clear center">

# The Logic of US Foreign Policy

<div class="post-content clear">

<div style="font-family:calibri, source sans pro;font-variant:none;text-align:justify;">

**Published**: May 2018; Updated: December 2019*  
***Languages**: [German](https://swprs.org/logik-imperialer-kriege/),
[Spanish](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2019/12/logic-of-us-foreign-policy-spanish.pdf),
[Arabic](https://swprs.org/the-logic-of-us-foreign-policy-arabic/),
[Hebrew](https://swprs.org/us-foreign-policy-hebrew/),
[Persian](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2019/12/logic-of-us-foreign-policy-persian.pdf)*  
*

How can US foreign policy be explained in a systematic and rational way?
The following chart – based on a model developed by political science
professors David Sylvan and Stephen Majeski – reveals the longstanding
imperial logic behind US diplomatic and military interventions around
the
globe.

[![](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2018/05/us-foreign-policy-hd.png?w=736)](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2018/05/us-foreign-policy-hd.png) <span style="color:#333333;">[Click
to enlarge
🔎](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2018/05/us-foreign-policy-hd.png)</span>

Due to its economic and military supremacy, the Unites States has been
assuming the role of a modern **empire** since the Second World War and
especially since 1990. This status implies a very specific, and a
genuinely imperial, logic of action for its foreign policy (see figure
above).

The central distinction (**\#1** in the figure above) from the
perspective of an empire is that between **client and non-client
states**. The concept of the client state dates back to the time of the
Roman Empire and denotes states that are basically self-governing but
nevertheless align their foreign and security policy and their
succession of government with the empire.

In the case of **existing client states** (left side of the diagram),
the empire has to decide between routine administration (**B** – e.g.
Switzerland and Austria), military or non-military (e.g. economic)
support (**D to I** – e.g. Colombia and Pakistan), or an attempt to
replace unacceptable client governments demo­cra­tically or militarily
(**A** – e.g. Greece 1967, Chile 1973). In certain cases, a client
government can no longer hold on to power despite imperial support and
must be dropped or the client state has to be abandoned altogether (**C,
F, G** – e.g. South Vietnam 1975 or Iran 1979).

In the case of **non-client states** (right side of diagram), the
situation is quite different. If a region newly comes into the empire’s
sphere of influence, the empire will first attempt to acquire its
members peacefully as client states (**J**). This was the case, e.g., in
Eastern Europe and the Baltic States after
1990.

[![](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2018/05/nato_map_final.png?w=650&h=416)](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2018/05/nato_map_final.png)

The eastern expansion of NATO
([CFR/NATO](https://www.cfr.org/backgrounder/north-atlantic-treaty-organization-nato))*  
*

If, on the other hand, a state refuses to become a client state, it
sooner or later becomes an **enemy state**. This is because, solely
through its independence and autonomy, it calls into question the
empire’s claim to hegemony and thus is threatening its internal and
external stability, as an empire that can no longer assert its hegemony
will fall apart. In this way, most empires slide into an almost
unavoidable compulsion to expand, which in the end will affect even
fundamentally peaceful states.

In case of enemy states, the empire must first decide whether **military
action** is promising or not (**\#11**). If not, the empire will
possibly start negotiations and, depending on the chances of success,
either end the enemy status (**K**) or impose **sanctions** or strive
for a (civilian) **regime change** (**L**).

Typical examples of this situation are currently Iran, North Korea,
Russia and increasingly China. It is no coincidence that most of these
states possess or are striving for nuclear weapons, because only in this
way can the decisive switch **\#11** be shifted permanently from
military to non-military scenarios. Another important factor is the
availability of essential raw materials such as oil and gas, as without
them it will not be possible to maintain independence in the long term.

The primary concern with **raw materials**, therefore, is not that the
empire wants to own them directly – after all, even enemy states such as
the former USSR, modern Russia, Iran, Libya or Venezuela have always
sold their raw materials to the West – but that raw materials give enemy
states inde­pen­dence and influence, which in itself constitutes a
threat from an imperial and hegemonic perspective.

If, on the other hand, the empire judges a military action as promising,
the next question is whether or not the enemy state or its government
has **international legitimacy** (**\#13**). If yes, a *covert* hostile
intervention has to be prepared, if no, an *overt* hostile intervention
is possible. In many cases, their autocratic form of government can be
used to deny enemy states international
legitimacy.  
[![](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2018/05/nato-partnerships.png?w=650&h=459)](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2018/05/nato-partnerships.png)

Libya and Syria/Lebanon were the last Mediterranean countries that were
not members of NATO’s Mediterranean Partnership (red) and instead wanted
to pursue their own regional policy.
([NATO](https://www.nato.int/cps/ua/natohq/topics_81136.htm))*  
*

**Covert hostile interventions** include, in particular, a coup d’état
(**M** – e.g. Iran 1953, Egypt 1956) and covert support for rebels
(**N** – e.g. Afghanistan 1979ff) or exile groups (**O** – e.g. Cuba
1961ff). These are, in general, classic intelligence operations.

In the case of **overt hostile interventions**, the first step is to
determine if an enemy state is already engaged in a conflict, if local
insurgents are present, and if own ground troops are required. Possible
results include asymmetric (air) attacks (**Q** – e.g. Serbia 1999),
support for rebels (**R** – e.g. Syria 2011ff), a targeted invasion
(**S** – e.g. Iraq 2003), or a full-scale war (**P** – e.g. Germany
1941-45, Korea 1950-51).

The imperial logic is fundamentally **independent of the respective US
government**. However, different governments may come to different
conclusions regarding the prospects of success of military action
(**\#11**) and diplomatic negotiations (**\#12**), the advantages of
overt versus covert operations (**\#13**), the acceptance of existing
client regimes (**\#2**), and domestic political support for military
intervention (**E**).

The logic described above also implies the key geopolitical functions of
[imperially oriented
media](https://swprs.org/the-american-empire-and-its-media/), viz. the
delegitimization of enemy states or their governments (**\#13**), the
support of overt and the con­ceal­ment of covert hostile operations
(**\#14** to **\#18**), the justification of sanctions and regime
changes (**L**), as well as assisting imperial leadership (**B**) and
the deposition of unwanted client regimes (**A**).

It is important to note, however, that the rapidly growing range of
[independent media outlets](https://swprs.org/media-navigator/)
available on the Internet makes a coherent media portrayal of imperial
interventions increasingly difficult. This is a rather new development
whose effects on imperial policy are not yet fully predictable.

  
Retired U.S. General Wesley Clark about the “seven countries in five
years” strategy  
Source: [Democracy
Now, 2007](https://www.democracynow.org/2007/3/2/gen_wesley_clark_weighs_presidential_bid)

#### Traditional Explanations

The Logic of US Foreign Policy by Sylvan and Majeski offers a consistent
explanation for American interventions of the past several decades. The
usual explanations – by proponents as well as opponents of these wars –
are, however, mostly to be seen as pretexts, rationalizations or at best
partial aspects, as the following overview shows.

1.  **Defending democracy and human rights**: This classical
    justification is not very convincing, since democratic governments
    have been overthrown (**A, M, N**), autocrats have been supported
    (**E** and **I**), human rights and international law have been
    violated or violations tolerated by the US.
2.  **Combating terrorism**: Paramilitary groups – including Islamist
    organizations – have been used [for
    decades](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operation_Cyclone) by the US
    to eliminate opposing regimes (**N** and **R**).
3.  **Specific threats or aggressions against the US**: In retrospect,
    most of these scenarios turned out to be incorrect or made-up
    (**\#13**; e.g. Tonkin, incubator and WMD claims).
4.  **Raw materials (especially oil and gas)**: Even enemy states
    generally want to sell their raw materials to the West, but are
    prevented from doing so by means of sanctions or war. This is
    because from an imperial point of view, their independence and
    influence is seen as a threat.
    1.  **Was the Iraq war about oil?** Hardly. Already prior to 2003,
        Iraq had supplied its oil mainly to the West; the Iraqi oil
        sector was [not
        privatized](https://theconversation.com/iraq-what-happened-to-the-oil-after-the-war-62188)
        after the war, and production licences were [also
        issued](https://www.reuters.com/article/us-iraq-oil-contracts/oil-companies-temper-iraqs-dreams-of-production-expansion-idUSKCN1GQ1ID)
        to corporations in France, Russia and China (which opposed the
        war).
    2.  **Was the Syrian war about natural gas pipelines?** No (see
        [here](https://truthout.org/articles/the-war-against-the-assad-regime-is-not-a-pipeline-war/)
        and
        [here](https://www.middleeasteye.net/big-story/pipelineistan-conspiracy-war-syria-has-never-been-about-gas)).
        The plans for regime change and war against geopolitically
        independent Syria had existed [for
        decades](https://www.globalresearch.ca/syrian-regime-change-a-70-year-project/5636433)
        and were to be implemented during the so-called “Arab Spring”.
        (See also
        a [comment](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=flaqLAp0Yp4&t=1674)
        by the Syrian president).
    3.  **Was the Afghanistan war about a natural gas pipeline?**
        [No](https://slate.com/culture/2001/12/is-the-afghan-war-about-an-oil-pipeline.html).
        The Taliban were and are interested in the [TAPI
        pipeline](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Turkmenistan%E2%80%93Afghanistan%E2%80%93Pakistan%E2%80%93India_Pipeline),
        but didn’t accept US political and military demands.
    4.  **Was the Libya war about oil reserves?** No. Libya was already
        one of Europe’s most important suppliers of oil under Gaddafi,
        and security of supply has
        [declined](http://www.businessinsider.com/r-how-unstable-is-libyas-oil-production-2018-3)
        significantly since the war. Libya, however, pursued an
        independent and comprehensive [Africa
        policy](https://globalresearch.ca/libya-a-war-on-africa/26474) –
        financed by its oil wealth – which collided with the plans of
        the US and France.
    5.  **Was the Iranian regime change in 1953 about the
        nationalization of oil?** No. The US tried to mediate in the
        British-Iranian oil dispute and urged the British to compromise.
        Only when Iranian Prime Minister Mossadegh cooperated with the
        Communist Tudeh Party and opened the country to the Soviet Union
        did the CIA intervene. Iranian oil, however, [remained
        nationalized](https://www.nationalreview.com/2015/07/what-really-happened-shahs-iran/)
        even after the coup.
    6.  **What was the 2019 Venezuela coup attempt about?** See
        [Venezuela: It’s Not About
        Oil](https://swprs.org/venezuela-its-not-about-the-oil/).
    7.  **Could renewable energies solve the raw materials problem?**
        Hardly, because renewable energies, storage technologies and
        high-tech electronics require [rare-earth
        metals](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rare-earth_element), 97%
        of which are currently produced by China, and conflict minerals
        such as [coltan](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coltan) from the
        Congo.
5.  **The** **“Petro-Dollar”**: The petro-dollar thesis was developed in
    the course of the Iraq war. However, the significance of the US
    dollar [does not derive from
    oil](https://foreignpolicy.com/2009/10/07/debunking-the-dumping-the-dollar-conspiracy/),
    but from US economic power. While many states naturally prefer the
    stable dollar for their raw material exports, enemy states often
    have to switch to other currencies in order to circumvent sanctions
    (**L**, e.g. Iran).
6.  **Capitalism**: In 1917 Lenin
    [described](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Imperialism,_the_Highest_Stage_of_Capitalism)
    “imperialism as the highest stage of capitalism,” since capitalist
    states would have to conquer markets for their overproduction.
    However, even enemy states want to trade with the West, but are
    prevented from doing so by sanctions or war. Moreover,
    pre-capitalist states like Rome and Spain and even anti-capitalist
    states like the Soviet Union had already waged imperial wars.
7.  **National debt**: The national debt is also no reason for US wars,
    as the US is
    [creating](https://www.investopedia.com/articles/investing/081415/understanding-how-federal-reserve-creates-money.asp)
    its own money by using the Fed. Moreover, wars themselves contribute
    immensely to national expenses.
8.  **Arms industry**: In 1961 US President Eisenhower warned of the
    increasing influence of the [“military-industrial
    complex”](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Military%E2%80%93industrial_complex).
    The latter is certainly one of the main profiteers of wars, but this
    applies as well to countries such as Russia, China, Sweden and
    Switzerland. Moreover, US wars are not arbitrary, but follow a
    certain logic; after all, even the Roman Empire did not conduct its
    wars merely to produce as many weapons as possible.
9.  **The “Israel Lobby”**: This aspect was emphasized in the
    [book](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Israel_Lobby_and_U.S._Foreign_Policy)
    of the same name by Professors Walt and Mearsheimer. The Israeli
    government and pro-Israeli organizations such as AIPAC
    [lobbied](https://fpif.org/dont_blame_the_iraq_debacle_on_the_israel_lobby/)
    for the 2003 Iraq War and a war against Iran. As a hegemonic power,
    however, the US must intervene from East Asia to Central Africa and
    South America, and even the wars in the Middle East follow a
    superordinate logic. (More: [The “Israel Lobby”: Facts and
    Myths](https://swprs.org/the-israel-lobby-facts-and-myths/))
10. **Neoconservatives**: Another hypothesis proposes that US wars are
    driven by the so-called
    [neo­con­ser­vatives](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neoconservatism).
    This idea is disconfirmed, for instance, by the numerous wars
    initiated or continued by the liberal Clinton and Obama
    administrations (Yugoslavia, Somalia, Syria, Yemen, etc.)

*»We’ve got about five or ten years to clean up those old Soviet client
regimes  
– Syria, Iran, Iraq – before the next great superpower comes on to
challenge us.«*  
Pentagon policy chief Paul Wolfowitz to General Wesley Clark in 1991
([FORA](https://youtu.be/TY2DKzastu8?t=3m6s))

#### Literature

Sylvan, David & Majeski, Stephen
([2009](http://www.us-foreign-policy-perspective.org/)): [U.S. Foreign
Policy in Perspective: Clients, Enemies and
Empire](http://www.us-foreign-policy-perspective.org/). Routledge,
London.

Blum, William
([2014](https://www.zedbooks.net/shop/book/killing-hope/)): US Military
and CIA Interventions Since World War II – Updated Edition. ZED Books,
London.

Brzezinski, Zbigniew
([1998](https://archive.org/details/TheGrandChessboardAmericanPrimacyAndItsGeostrategicImperatives1997ZbigniewBrzezinski)):
The Grand Chessboard: American Primacy And Its Geostrategic Imperatives.
Basic Books, New York.

Haass, Richard ([2017](https://www.cfr.org/book/world-disarray)): A
World in Disarray: American Foreign Policy and the Crisis of the Old
Order. Penguin Press, London.

Kagan, Robert
([1998](http://carnegieendowment.org/1998/06/01/benevolent-empire-pub-275)):
The Benevolent Empire. Foreign Policy Magazine.

Kissinger, Henry
([2015](https://www.penguinrandomhouse.com/books/316669/world-order-by-henry-kissinger/9780143127710)):
World Order. Penguin Books, London.

#### See also

  - [Rwanda: What Did Really Happen
    in 1994?](https://swprs.org/rwanda-what-did-really-happen-in-1994/)
  - [Propaganda in the War on
    Yugoslavia](https://swprs.org/propaganda-in-the-war-on-yugoslavia/)
  - [The American Empire and its
    Media](https://swprs.org/the-american-empire-and-its-media/)

</div>

-----

Share this on:
[Twitter](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?url=https://swprs.org/us-foreign-policy/)
/
[Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/share.php?u=https://swprs.org/us-foreign-policy/)  
Published: May 2018; Updated: December
    2019

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div id="footer" class="footer bg-graphite">

<div class="section-inner row clear" data-role="complementary">

<div class="column column-1 one-third medium-padding">

<div class="widgets">

<div id="nav_menu-3" class="widget widget_nav_menu">

<div class="widget-content clear">

### Swiss Policy Research

<div class="menu-allgemein-container">

  - <span id="menu-item-251">[Kontakt](https://swprs.org/kontakt/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-33090">[Übersicht](https://swprs.org/uebersicht/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-33286">[Donationen](https://swprs.org/donationen/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-15372">[Disclaimer](https://swprs.org/disclaimer/)</span>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="column column-2 one-third medium-padding">

<div class="widgets">

<div id="nav_menu-4" class="widget widget_nav_menu">

<div class="widget-content clear">

### English

<div class="menu-english-container">

  - <span id="menu-item-20017">[About Us /
    Contact](https://swprs.org/contact/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-20015">[The Media
    Navigator](https://swprs.org/media-navigator/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-20016">[The CFR and the
    Media](https://swprs.org/the-american-empire-and-its-media/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-33285">[Donations](https://swprs.org/donations/)</span>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="column column-3 one-third medium-padding">

<div class="widgets">

<div id="blog_subscription-4" class="widget widget_blog_subscription jetpack_subscription_widget">

<div class="widget-content clear">

### Follow by email

Follow

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="credits section bg-dark small-padding">

<div class="credits-inner section-inner clear">

[WordPress.com](https://wordpress.com/?ref=footer_custom_com).

[Up ↑](# "To the top")

</div>

</div>

<div style="display:none">

</div>

<div id="carousel-reblog-box">

Post to

<div class="submit">

<span class="canceltext">[Cancel](#)</span>

</div>

<div class="arrow">

</div>

</div>

![](https://pixel.wp.com/b.gif?v=noscript)
