[Skip to
content](#content)

[](https://swprs.org/)

<div class="cover">

</div>

[Search](#search-container)

<div id="search-container" class="header-search-block bg-graphite hidden">

<span class="screen-reader-text">Search for:</span>

</div>

<div class="header-inner section-inner">

[![Swiss Policy Research
Logo](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2020/05/swiss-policy-research-logo-300.png)](https://swprs.org/)

[Swiss Policy Research](https://swprs.org/)

Geopolitics and
    Media

</div>

<div class="navigation section no-padding bg-dark">

Menu

<div class="main-navigation">

  - <span id="menu-item-4374">[Start](https://swprs.org)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-5941">[Studien](https://swprs.org/srf-propaganda-analyse/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-4361">[SRF /
        ZDF](https://swprs.org/srf-propaganda-analyse/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-4359">[NZZ-Studie](https://swprs.org/die-nzz-studie/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-4373">[Agenturen](https://swprs.org/der-propaganda-multiplikator/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-7978">[Medienmatrix](https://swprs.org/die-propaganda-matrix/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-9423">[Analysen](https://swprs.org/medien-navigator/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-9414">[Navigator](https://swprs.org/medien-navigator/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-8524">[Techniken](https://swprs.org/der-propaganda-schluessel/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-10908">[Wikipedia](https://swprs.org/propaganda-in-der-wikipedia/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-9920">[Kriege](https://swprs.org/logik-imperialer-kriege/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-4362">[Netzwerke](https://swprs.org/netzwerk-medien-schweiz/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-6283">[Schweiz](https://swprs.org/netzwerk-medien-schweiz/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-7215">[Deutschland](https://swprs.org/netzwerk-medien-deutschland/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-17401">[Österreich](https://swprs.org/medien-in-oesterreich/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-7216">[USA](https://swprs.org/das-american-empire-und-seine-medien/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-9228">[Fokus
    I](https://swprs.org/bericht-eines-journalisten/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-12119">[Journalistenbericht](https://swprs.org/bericht-eines-journalisten/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-12117">[Russische
        Propaganda](https://swprs.org/russische-propaganda/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-12118">[Die
        »Israel-Lobby«](https://swprs.org/die-israel-lobby-fakten-und-mythen/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-13505">[Pädokriminalität](https://swprs.org/geopolitik-und-paedokriminalitaet/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-17258">[Fokus
    II](https://swprs.org/migration-und-medien/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-32838">[Coronavirus](https://swprs.org/covid-19-hinweis-ii/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-12939">[Integrity
        Initiative](https://swprs.org/die-integrity-initiative/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-17290">[Migration &
        Medien](https://swprs.org/migration-und-medien/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-17291">[Magnitsky
        Act](https://swprs.org/der-fall-magnitsky/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-21964">[Projekt](https://swprs.org/kontakt/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-8525">[Kontakt](https://swprs.org/kontakt/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-10193">[Seitenübersicht](https://swprs.org/uebersicht/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-8637">[Medienspiegel](https://swprs.org/medienspiegel/)</span>
      - <span id="menu-item-33287">[Donationen](https://swprs.org/donationen/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-14415">[English](https://swprs.org/contact/)</span>

</div>

[Open Search](#)

</div>

<div class="wrapper section medium-padding">

<div class="section-inner clear" data-role="main">

<div id="content" class="content clear center">

# Venezuela: It’s Not About Oil

<div class="post-content clear">

<div lang="en-us" style="text-align:left;">

![Flight route of Russian Tu-160 long-range nuclear bombers on 10
December
2018.](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2019/02/venezuela.jpg?w=600&h=302)

February 2019 ([German](https://swprs.org/venezuela-erdoel/))

**Even in Venezuela, regime change is not about oil.**

As argued in [*The Logic of US Foreign
Policy*](https://swprs.org/us-foreign-policy/) and contrary to
conventional wisdom, US interventions of the last several decades were
not “about oil”.

This is obviously true for Yugoslavia, Afghanistan and Yemen (which own
no oil), but also for Iraq, Libya and Syria. In the case of Syria, the
“pipeline theory” was based on a [single false
report](https://truthout.org/articles/the-war-against-the-assad-regime-is-not-a-pipeline-war/).
In Iraq, oil [never
got](https://theconversation.com/iraq-what-happened-to-the-oil-after-the-war-62188)
privatized after the war. In Libya, production
[collapsed](http://www.businessinsider.com/r-how-unstable-is-libyas-oil-production-2018-3).

The oil narrative is now reappearing in Venezuela’s case, as Venezuela
owns the largest con­ven­tional oil reserves in the world. But the
attempted regime change in Venezuela is not about oil either.

As a matter of fact, the US has already been the [largest
buyer](https://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=9651) of
Venezuelan oil for years. And if the US wanted to physically “control”
the oil, why is it that of all countries in South America, Venezuela
(together with Bolivia) is the last one to be geopolitically independent
of the US?

It is because the geostrategic logic works just the other way round:
Venezuela is independent because of its oil, and this independence is a
problem from a US perspective. On the one hand Venezuela is a political,
economic and military outpost for Russia and China, on the other hand
Venezuela supports additional “enemy states” such as, notably, Cuba and
Nicaragua.

A regime change in Venezuela would neutralize this entire
Russian-Chinese “Latin network” in one fell swoop, ideally without
firing a shot – a geostrategic gambit to enforce the 1823 [Monroe
Doctrine](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monroe_Doctrine).

![John Bolton: Supporters and opponents of regime change in Venezuela
(28 January
2019)](https://swprs.files.wordpress.com/2019/02/bolton-maduro-map.jpg?w=450&h=263)

Proponents of the oil narrative often cite as “evidence” a FOX Business
News [interview](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8av-cPP1uPE) about the
situation in Venezuela with US National Security Advisor John Bolton.
However, regarding oil Bolton merely stated that “socialist dictator”
Maduro had mismanaged the oil industry, while the “new president”,
backed by US industry, would boost investments again. A trivial
statement.

Venezuela, while rich in oil, can neither control the global market
price nor withhold its oil from another country; on the contrary, it
vitally depends on export earnings. For the exact same reason, the USSR
supplied Western Europe during the Cold War without any interruption or
threat.

The only case in which military control of oil resources becomes
relevant is during an active war. However, given its geographical
location, Venezuela clearly won’t supply oil to China (or anywhere else)
in a Third World War, no matter what its president’s name is. In such a
scenario, China will have to source its oil mainly from Russia and
Kazakhstan.

(Incidentally, China’s largest [oil
supplier](https://oilprice.com/Energy/Crude-Oil/The-Battle-For-Chinas-Oil-Market.html)
currently is none other than US protectorate Saudi Arabia).

Another misleading idea is the so-called [petrodollar
theory](https://foreignpolicy.com/2009/10/07/debunking-the-dumping-the-dollar-conspiracy/):
countries like Iraq, Iran, Libya, Russia or Venezuela do not become
enemy states because they renounce the US dollar, but they (have to)
renounce the US dollar because they are enemy states – and want to
bypass US sanctions.

The oil narrative is, nevertheless, popular with [Russian
media](https://www.rt.com/usa/449982-john-bolton-oil-venezuela/) –
apparently they prefer to talk about greedy Americans rather than about
Russian zones of influence in Latin America.

#### Read also

  - [The Logic of US Foreign
    Policy](https://swprs.org/us-foreign-policy/)
  - [The American Empire and its
    Media](https://swprs.org/the-american-empire-and-its-media/)
  - [The Media Navigator](https://swprs.org/media-navigator/)

-----

Published: February
    2019

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div id="footer" class="footer bg-graphite">

<div class="section-inner row clear" data-role="complementary">

<div class="column column-1 one-third medium-padding">

<div class="widgets">

<div id="nav_menu-3" class="widget widget_nav_menu">

<div class="widget-content clear">

### Swiss Policy Research

<div class="menu-allgemein-container">

  - <span id="menu-item-251">[Kontakt](https://swprs.org/kontakt/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-33090">[Übersicht](https://swprs.org/uebersicht/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-33286">[Donationen](https://swprs.org/donationen/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-15372">[Disclaimer](https://swprs.org/disclaimer/)</span>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="column column-2 one-third medium-padding">

<div class="widgets">

<div id="nav_menu-4" class="widget widget_nav_menu">

<div class="widget-content clear">

### English

<div class="menu-english-container">

  - <span id="menu-item-20017">[About Us /
    Contact](https://swprs.org/contact/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-20015">[The Media
    Navigator](https://swprs.org/media-navigator/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-20016">[The CFR and the
    Media](https://swprs.org/the-american-empire-and-its-media/)</span>
  - <span id="menu-item-33285">[Donations](https://swprs.org/donations/)</span>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="column column-3 one-third medium-padding">

<div class="widgets">

<div id="blog_subscription-4" class="widget widget_blog_subscription jetpack_subscription_widget">

<div class="widget-content clear">

### Follow by email

Follow

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<div class="credits section bg-dark small-padding">

<div class="credits-inner section-inner clear">

[WordPress.com](https://wordpress.com/?ref=footer_custom_com).

[Up ↑](# "To the top")

</div>

</div>

<div style="display:none">

</div>

<div id="carousel-reblog-box">

Post to

<div class="submit">

<span class="canceltext">[Cancel](#)</span>

</div>

<div class="arrow">

</div>

</div>

![](https://pixel.wp.com/b.gif?v=noscript)
